Inside, Yugi and Joey are seated across from each other at a pair of desks pushed together front-to-front, each holding a hand of cards and with a game board spread out in front of him.
Joey holds his other hand over his cards, silently debating which one to play.
Tristan affectionately grabs Joey in a half-hearted neck-lock and looks over his shoulder at the cards.
Joey pushes Tristan away, and Tristan stands back from the duel with Téa.
Joey slaps a card down on the table, and we get a close look at it.
Yugi grins and plays his card.
Joey twitches and drops his cards.
We pan back from the duel and see that, along with Téa and Tristan, two other girls and two other boys have gathered around to watch the duel, including a boy with shoulder-length white hair. Across the room, Seto Kaiba has his nose in a book.
Kaiba looks up from his book. Back at the duel, Joey's leaning back in his chair looking disgruntled.
Joey slams his hands down on the desk and stands up, leaning over it.
Yugi's grandpa is standing at the counter in the back of the shop.
Joey, Tristan, and Téa are standing behind Yugi. He stands no higher than any of their elbows, including hair as margin for error.
As he speaks, grandpa pulls a small wooden box from behind the counter. It contains a single Duel Monsters card, with a picture of a mighty silver-blue dragon) .
Tristan plucks the card from grandpa's hand and flaps it around.
Grandpa's jaw drops; Téa, Joey, and Yugi look at Tristan in embarrassed disbelief. Grandpa snatches it back.
The bell on the door jingles again, and we know instantly that this newcomer is trouble.
Yugi and his friends look at the door; It's Kaiba, carrying a metal briefcase.
Yugi runs and gets between them.
Kaiba suddenly glimpses grandpa's Blue-Eyes White Dragon, back in its little box. He shoves Yugi and the others to the side, ignoring their protests.
Kaiba is breaking into sweat as he stares at the precious card, his hand poised over it. Grandpa breaks the tension by clapping the lid of the box shut.
Kaiba recovers quickly, and is not happy. He lifts his briefcase and slams it on the counter, thoroughly shocking Grandpa.  Kaiba opens it and flips it around, and Grandpa oohs and ahhs at the sight of what's in the briefcase.) .
The briefcase is full of cards. The entire top row is fusion monsters, including Giltia the Knight, Punished Eagle, Roaring Ocean Snake, and Labyrinth Tank. The rest is spell cards-- Block Attack, Mooyan Curry, Red Medicine, Polymerization, Remove Trap-- and high-level monsters like Launcher Spider, Cyber Soldier, Monstrous Bird, Boulder Tortoise, Sea King Dragon, Togex, Flame Cerebrus, Air Eater, Battle Steer, and others. TYG001_id1.
Yugi is oblivious to Kaiba's rage and desperation.
Kaiba snaps the case shut.
Ahead of the car, we see the KaibaCorp Headquarters skyscraper loom in the distance.
At KaibaCorp Headquarters.
Inside, Grandpa is tending the shop when he hears the bell jingle.
Grandpa turns, already wary as soon as he sees this trio; at the forefront is a short, bald man with orange-lensed pince-nez glasses and a grotesquely wide face. The other two are nondescript in black suits, crew cuts, and sunglasses-- very Men In Black or Secret Service. These are clearly goons sent from KaibaCorp. The middle one speaks.
The bell jingles as they enter the shop.
The shop is empty.
The phone rings;  Yugi answers it.
Grandpa props himself on an elbow.
Kaiba is standing in a doorway across from the elevator, half-silhouetted in bright white light.
Kaiba shows them the Blue-Eyes White Dragon...
...And rips it cleanly in half!! Everyone gasps in horror, but Yugi is the most devastated of all.
Grandpa raises a shaking hand, giving Yugi a deck of dueling cards.
Yugi stares Kaiba down, completely terrified, on the verge of tears.
Yugi turns, surprised.
Yugi nods, and accepts grandpa's deck.
Téa pulls out a black marker.
She's drawn a smiley-face across the backs of their four hands, with part of it on each one. The three boys, utterly nonplussed, look at the black marker all over their hands.
Yugi nods. The ambulance arrives and Tristan carries grandpa to it on his back, Joey and Téa following. When they stop, Téa turns to Joey.
It adds *something*; Yugi and Kaiba face each other atop platforms with consoles to play the cards on, across a stadium that's perhaps the size of two basketball courts side-by-side. Above in the center, the light fixture also holds a scoreboard--already set to 2000 lifepoints each-- much like a professional sports arena, and other light comes from lights around the domed wall that, from a distance, give the impression of a spider web. The floor between the two podia is green with white lines painted or tiled into it, two sets of fourteen rectangles in two rows, just like a tabletop mat for cards. Contrasting the modern high-tech arena, the stadium seats are stone, with giant stalagmites around the edges. The visual effect is something like a high-tech cave, or lair; Kaiba has lured his prey onto his home turf.
The Millennium Puzzle, hanging on a cord around Yugi's neck, begins to glow, and shakes and sways on its own. Whether aloud or in his head, we'll never know, Yugi cries out--.
And as the word is spoken, the voice speaking it grows deeper. From a grey void appears swirling lines, strange symbols, rushing wind, and a column of blue-white light, in which there appears a figure. He's like Yugi, but isn't. This presence radiates power, confidence, and strength. Yugi looks at Kaiba across the duel stadium, but is no longer the timid, shy kid who challenged him. Kaiba notices immediately.
A fixture in the ceiling starts to glow, and a green column of light appears in one of the spaces in front of Kaiba, starting grainy and solidifying into a green giant just like the one on the card, standing a few yards taller than the duelists' podia.
Yugi's sky-blue dragon appears on his side of the field, just as tall as the Hitotsu-Me Giant. Joey runs into the stadium and stops short when he sees the two huge monsters about to do battle.
Kaiba's giant roars as Yugi's dragon attacks and hits it with a fireball straight in the chest. Kaiba braces himself, shielding his face and gripping the rail of the podium as the explosion rocks it. Kaiba's lifepoints now stand at 1800. A little boy, maybe eleven or twelve, with long black hair, an orange shirt, and a blue bandanna hurries to the sidelines on Kaiba's side of the field.
Kaiba draws a card, looks at it, and smiles.
Saggi is a jester-type clown, with puffy bloomers and sleeves, stripey tights, a pointy hat, and wacky purple boots and gloves. His face is reminiscent of a Picasso painting.
The clown gets bigger and uglier; its points are now 1800.
Winged Dragon is destroyed. Yugi's lifepoints drop to 1600.
Yugi goes to draw a card, his right hand still crisscrossed with black marker.
He draws, and looks at his card. It's a right leg. Just a leg.
Yugi places the card on the console, and a zone of his field begins to glow.
Yugi's defensive monster, Sangan, is destroyed. Joey pounds his fists on the stone rail.
Saggi blows away monster after monster.  Next to fall is a red dragon TYG001_id2, then Yugi's Feral Imp. A few turns later, Yugi is still struggling.
Kaiba seems uncertain for a split second.
He draws, and looks. And smiles.
Gaia appears on the field, a knight on a purple horse with two large red lances, one in each hand.
Gaia charges, and takes out Saggi the Dark Clown. Kaiba's lifepoints fall to 1300.
Blue-Eyes appears, the mighty dragon from the card, even more amazing in person. It roars its supremacy over the dueling field.
Blue-Eyes roars, and blue-white fire pours from its mouth, obliterating Gaia the Fierce Knight. Yugi's down to 900 lifepoints.
As Kaiba speaks, Blue-Eyes blows away monster after monster...
Kaiba summons another Blue-Eyes, just as devastating and majestic as the first.
He looks at the card he drew, and gasps.
The Swords materialize high above Kaiba's side of the field, and stab down among the Blue-Eyeses like prison bars; they can't move.
Yugi looks at his hand; it contains Rude Kaiser, a right leg, a left leg, and a right arm.
Suddenly, Yugi thinks he hears grandpa's voice.
Yugi looks over his shoulder; a vision of grandpa is standing behind him.
Grandpa fades and disappears; Yugi reaches out a hand after him.
Grandpa's voice echoes back to him.
End Flashback.
Yugi draws, and looks; it's another arm! BTW, Yugi already had a Right Arm, so this would make two. Small continuity glitch.
It destroys Yugi's defense monster, Rude Kaiser. Yugi winces, and draws again; his card is the Dark Magician.
Judge Man goes down. Kaiba's at 1000 lifepoints now.
Yugi looks panicked as the third dragon appears on the field with a cry.
It does, and destroys the Dark Magician. Yugi's lifepoints now stand at 400.
His deck seems to shy away from the hand poised to draw a card.
For a moment we see the confident Yugi and the shy one split apart, and both are trying hard to stay calm as they contemplate what this next draw means.
Suddenly he notices the friendship symbol's marker lines all over the back of his right hand.
He seems to see his friends standing before him, holding their hands over the deck as well in the three other pieces of the friendship symbol. They look at him.
He picks it up off the top of his deck, no longer in any doubt that it was there) .
He places the five cards across the console. A large, vertical, many-pointed star appears on the field, and through one of the points emerges an arm, then another through the opposite point, then Exodia's head appears in the middle of the star as the great behemoth pulls itself from its prison and faces the three Blue-Eyes White Dragons, which are now looking decisively smaller.  Kaiba is freaking out.
Exodia concentrates energy between its massive palms, and then uses it to blow away all three Blue-Eyeses in a blaze of golden light. Kaiba screams as the blaze obscures him from view. His lifepoints drop all the way to zero.
As Yugi speaks a small, glowing golden eye appears on his forehead.
With this last, Yugi exerts some kind of power; something seems to shatter and crack off of Kaiba, and suddenly he looks more human, if no less shaken. He falls to his knees.
This sinister new character is sitting in the dark, the only light coming from a doorway in which the minion who just told him this news is standing. Pegasus has long white hair, the strands of which, on the left side, have fallen away from concealing an eye that is made of gold. Clearly affluent, Pegasus holds a wineglass in his hand, and his collar is frilly and ruffly.
This means trouble; the golden eye sparks ominously, as he smiles.
She flip-summons her monster; Happy Lover.
She puts it down; it's a magic card.
Yugi, acting more or less as referee, is quite enjoying the duel.
And Joey has lost again.
On a pair of chin-up bars somewhere on the school campus, Joey leans his elbows on one, and Yugi sits on the other. Yugi hops off the bar and walks over to Joey.
Joey stops leaning, surprised, and digs in a pocket.
He hands Yugi his deck and leans on the bar again.
Yugi skims through Joey's cards, and the more cards he looks at, the more concerned the look on his face. His eyes get bigger and bigger.
As Yugi holds the deck, we notice the top card is M-Warrior #2{&}. Joey runs over and grips Yugi by the shoulders.
Inside the shop, grandpa's in the middle of putting up a duel poster that depicts a clash between Black Luster Soldier and Harpie's Pet Dragon.
Grandpa climbs down from his stepladder.
The poster has caught Joey's eye. Grandpa looks up at it.
Joey is a little bit scared, and therefore pretends he's not.
Joey starts to panic-- he messed up big time!.
Joey gets on his knees and begs Yugi.
Joey looks up; he might still have a chance!.
We start to get the sense that Yugi's goading grandpa into agreeing to teach Joey, or even that Yugi knows already that grandpa's just giving Joey a good scare to start his training off right.
One podium in the duel stadium appears out of the wall, and on it stands Weevil, a short fellow with a nasty little grin and light blue hair. He wears big, round glasses with yellow frames, and his jacket is a green not quite bright enough to be classified as chartreuse.
Rex is just as short as Weevil, keeping his wild brown hair down with a bright red cap, with a few purple-streaked bangs poking out of the front. He wears a green shirt and a khaki vest, and looks ready for a fight.
Joey closes his eyes and holds up his head, mock-affronted.
Joey doesn't open his eyes, and we can hear him snoring quietly. He's fallen asleep on the spot, proving Yugi's point.
But grandpa had been right there with a bundle of sticks, and whacked the table hard.
End flashback.
Joey starts awake, and looks at Tristan with annoyance. Téa laughs. Joey groans.
Grandpa walks into the room carrying a box.
Joey groans.
Joey's so moved by the praise, his eyes start to water. He goes to hug grandpa--.
-- And the sweet moment is ruined as grandpa obliviously moves out of Joey's reach, walking over to Yugi. Joey falls off the back of the couch and probably lands on his face.
He accepts the box grandpa was carrying and reads the label.
Joey climbs back onto the couch.
End Flashback.
They turn back to the screen, and so do we.
Open on the Two-Headed King Rex, right where we left Weevil and Rex's televised duel.
Weevil's trap is a card called "Infinite Dismissal".
A localized whirlwind appears around King Rex, keeping it from moving.
This equip spell card is officially known as "Insect Armor With Laser Cannon".
Basic Insect fires its new shoulder-mounted cannon and hits King Rex square in the chest. Rex groans aloud;  King Rex recoils from the energy blast and the electricity that came with it, and disappears.
Weevil's podium lowers him to the arena floor, and he raises his deck with a triumphant snicker.
The floor inside the border of one of Weevil's trap zones contains a separate panel; a trapdoor. This slides open and Pegasus enters the stadium by way of an elevator platform. This is the ominous gentleman we saw at the end of last episode, who habitually keeps his long white hair concealing his left eye. He holds a golden trophy, rather modest in size. The lights shine down and the stadium audience goes crazy. Pegasus walks over to Weevil, who is *extremely* short and tiny, and hands him the trophy, speaking with measured sincerity and warmth.
Weevil's blushing a bit under his glasses, starstruck.
As Pegasus continues, his words take on the ring of importance and grandeur.
The others lean in. Inside the box, well-padded, we see a red glove with a thick metal wristband that has star-shaped holes punched in it; a plastic case containing two small star-shaped objects, and a plain black videotape.
Yugi picks up the video and looks at it.
Yugi puts the video in the VCR below the TV, and they gather around to watch. After a moment of static, the face of Pegasus appears on the screen and he speaks to them.
Pegasus chuckles, as though he heard their remarks, then looks right at them, through the screen. A few strands of his hair fall aside, and through them can be seen the strange golden eye. It shines with an inner power, and the picture on the screen wavers as though seen through a heat haze. He answers without speaking...
Once again, the mysterious Millennium Puzzle begins to glow, and shakes and sways on its own. Whether aloud or in his head, we'll never know, Yugi cries out--.
As the word is spoken, the voice speaking it grows deeper. From a grey void appears swirling lines, strange symbols, rushing wind, and a column of blue-white light, in which there appears a figure. He's like Yugi, but isn't.  The more confident, stronger Yugi seems almost to glow with light in this otherworldly realm as he appears, facing Pegasus with a confident and somewhat forbidding smile. He will not be intimidated.
Suddenly Pegasus is no longer quite contained within the TV screen, but stands across a table painted with two opposing sets of the familiar layout of card zones. The black robe he wears over his usual red attire causes him to blend into the darkness except for his face and hands. A countdown somewhere begins to count. 15:00, 14:59... as Pegasus places a card facedown in one of his spell/trap zones.
Yugi draws his card and places it in his hand.
Yugi holds up a card, about to slap it down. A golden glow emanates from behind Pegasus' hair where his left eye would be.
Indeed, the card he was about to play is Koumori Dragon [1500/1200/L4/dark].
Yugi glares back at Pegasus, cornered at an unfair disadvantage.
Yugi glares at Pegasus, cornered. Behind him, Téa, Grandpa, Joey, and Tristan are still motionless statues.
The trap card Pegasus holds up begins to glow, and Yugi shields his face as blinding white light blasts out of the TV. The dragon on the card appears above Yugi.
As Pegasus speaks, we see a mighty magician we will later recognize as the Magician of Black Chaos send a sparkling orb of electrical energy racing toward a crusty, sinister beast we will later know as Relinquished.
Suddenly a monster on Pegasus' side appears; this strange-looking creature is an ornate bottle with arms that plays a long flute.
Yugi's monster is a huge, ferocious wolf. Koumori Dragon sticks its head out of the TV screen and blasts it. Yugi covers his face, surrounded by fire.
Yugi's lifepoints drop from 2000 to 1500.
Yugi's smiling, genuinely intrigued and amazed.
Pegasus places a card facedown. He currently has Dragon Piper, Dragon Capture Jar, and a facedown trap or spell on the field.
Pegasus lifts the hair over the left side of his face, revealing the golden eye that sits in place of a real left eye. And it sees Zombie Warrior in Yugi's hand even as Yugi does. We glimpse Yugi's hand; his cards are Beaver Warrior, Horn Imp, Breath of Light, Zombie Warrior, and Magic Formula.
The moment Yugi reaches for it, Pegasus starts to chuckle.
Yugi draws a new card, holding it facedown.
Yugi grins bitterly.
He flips up the card he's been holding facedown and places it on the field.
Pegasus is not amused, then he shrugs it off with sarcasm.
Yugi's new monster appears on the field. The Dark Magician is a sorcerer who wears purple armor and carries a staff of the same layered design. He points the staff at Koumori Dragon.
The Dark Magician extends a palm, and power emanates from the motion, momentarily reversing the colors around him. Pegasus flinches away as Koumori Dragon explodes.
Pegasus' lifepoints now stand at 1200.
We know this card nowadays as Illusionist Faceless Mage.
Eye of Illusion is a magic card. Faceless Mage appears from the card, an unknown factor and dangerous. We can hear the panic in Yugi's voice.
Dark Magician attacks; Faceless Mage casts a spell of its own and a golden eye shape appears in the air before it. The result is an explosion of light. When Yugi can see again, the field is the same.
He glances at the clock. 5:02, 5:01, 5:00, 4:59... Yugi's lifepoints stand at 1500, Pegasus' at 1200.
He grits his teeth, determined to see this through.
Yugi draws, looks, and summons his new monster.
Celtic Guardian is an pointy-eared, armored warrior who wields a sword.
Yugi's left with 400 lifepoints.
Suddenly he realizes that the Dark Magician on his field is in a trance, a golden eye glowing on his chest.
Pegasus places a facedown.
He claps his hands as though to applaud himself. The timer ticks down: 0:10, 0:09...
Yugi holds up another monster, the Summoned Skull. Pegasus isn't smiling anymore, and for the first time looks frustrated. Yugi literally throws the card on the table as the timer ticks down: 0:03, 0:02...
Summoned Skull lunges for Faceless Mage as the clock ticks down to 0:00. Both monsters vanish before they can battle. The duel is over. Pegasus has 1200 lifepoints, Yugi has 400.
Yugi waits for the hammer to fall; he lost a duel that was to save himself and his friends.
Pegasus wags his finger.
With that, the Millennium Eye shines gold; Yugi braces himself for the worst, but the Eye isn't targeting him-- the beam of light hits his grandpa, frozen in time behind him. A ghost of grandpa drifts out of the frozen figure and vanishes into the television screen.
When Yugi looks again, realizing nothing just happened to him, grandpa's face appears on the screen, calling out to him for help through the static.
Yugi's face alters instantly back to just Yugi himself, the confident presence gone. He gasps, confused for a moment, then realizes with alarm what has happened.
Grandpa's face disappears from the screen, and instead we hear Pegasus' voice one last time as the shadows disappear, Joey, Téa, and Tristan wake up, and behind them grandpa keels over, unconscious. Yugi doesn't notice them, frantically shaking the TV set in growing panic.
Close-in on the eye of a seagull, then pan out as it flies away toward the ship approaching Duelist Kingdom. The day is sunny and beautiful, the water is sparkling, and there's a sense of anticipation in the air. Yugi, Joey, Tristan, and Téa stand at the bow of the ship, watching the island grow closer.
The ship drops anchor at a concrete pier, and more black-suited tournament officials await the passengers.
More passengers have gathered at the rail of the ship. A loudspeaker addresses them.
Tristan suddenly gets nervous.
One of the security guys notices Tristan.
Tristan stops dead; he's been caught!! Yugi, Joey, and Téa turn around.
He hurries away before the security guy can reconsider.
Joey sneezes; Téa dodges to the side with a shriek.
Joey sniffs.
Joey leaps over the side.
Joey dives straight downward and hits the water with a splash. End flashback.
Weevil is watching them from across the dock, smirking unpleasantly. Yugi glares back.
Kemo , one of the black-suited tournament security, addresses the duelists assembled on the pier.
Kemo gestures broadly to a large castle at the top of a series of stone steps up the rock formations that support it.
The boys stop walking.
Téa points.
They peer into the trees. Bakura has vanished.
As they turn away and keep walking, Bakura reappears from behind the tree, watching them go.
Mako is a proud, tanned fisherman duelist, gazing up at the castle undaunted. He carries a harpoon in the hand that doesn't have a duel glove on it, and isn't wearing a shirt. He doesn't seem to notice the duelists nearby staring at him in awe.
Nearby in the crowd, Yugi and his friend overhear this. Joey and Téa smugly nudge Yugi, who looks a bit unnerved at this evidence of his notoriety.
Kemo is addressing them once again, this time from the balcony of the castle.
Yugi watches the balcony intently; his enemy is about to appear.
From Joey's tone, the five minutes would consist of Pegasus getting beaten up. Pegasus appears on the balcony, striking in his gold-buttoned red suit. He gazes down at the crowd superiorly.
Pegasus lifts his hair, revealing the Millennium Eye underneath.
The Millennium Eye zaps grandpa and his image appears in the TV.
The image disappears. End Flashback.
Pegasus continues to observe the crowd, his face shadowed and sinister as he chuckles.
Pegasus spreads his arms welcomingly and addresses the crowd; some people cheer. I count 46 duelists in the visible crowd, including Mai, Rex, and Weevil. Pegasus once again has his left eye covered, and only his living right one is visible.
Weevil listens with a fiendish grin, Rex resolutely.
As he listens, Yugi looks down at the deck in his hand. Several other duelists are doing the same thing.
In his right hand, Pegasus holds one of the dark red gloves we've seen tournament duelists wearing. In his left, he holds two of the metal stars that fit in the glove. Yugi puts on his dueling glove.
Another shot of the crowd; I count fifty, including Yugi and his friends, Mai, Weevil, and possibly Mako.
The crowd cheers. Pegasus turns and retreats from the balcony, his Millennium Eye glimmering.
Fireworks start shooting up into the bright blue sky from the towers of the castle.
And the tournament has begun!.
Ahead of them, the path forks, and one direction leads straight into the forest while the other continues in the meadow. Weevil is standing on the path ahead at the edge of the forest, just barely visible in the distance.
Weevil doesn't answer, but turns and darts into the forest, cackling.
Yugi starts running after him.
Joey, Téa, and Tristan run after Yugi.
end Flashback.
They reach a clearing in the forest; Weevil is waiting for them.
End flashback.
Once again, the mysterious Millennium Puzzle begins to glow, and shakes and sways on its own. Whether aloud or in his head, we'll never know, Yugi cries out--.
As the word is spoken, the voice speaking it grows deeper. From a grey void appears swirling lines, strange symbols, rushing wind, and a column of blue-white light, in which there appears a figure. He's like Yugi, but isn't. The new presence looks like he's going to have fun crushing Weevil.
At Weevil's cry, the ground begins to shake. Yugi and his friends look uneasy.
Weevil laughs evilly; he was expecting this, and he's ready.
The ground rumbles as Yugi's friends gasp and Weevil chuckles. A glowing multicolored line appears in the ground, and the earth splits in two at the line, revealing that this area of ground was actually the surface of a giant metal door. Somewhere within, pulleys and mechanisms smoothly go into action, spitting steam.
As the large rectangular patch of ground opens up, an equally-large object appears from below. The holographic duel arena rises from the depths of the earth at Weevil's back, a large number 15 on its side. One end of it is red, the other blue. Two tall podia of the same color unfold from it, overlooking the stage between them, which is the familiar grid of ten rectangles per side.Two towers of lights also unfold from each side; the holographic projectors.
Weevil runs and jumps onto the platform at the base of the red podium, tossing his backpack at his side. The platform rises until he looks out over the podium, his glasses glinting in the sun.
Yugi takes the blue podium.
A trio of bystanders walking through the forest shows up.
Téa and Tristan groan. The three random guys are amazed.
The holographic towers start to light up.
Both begin with 2000 lp.
Weevil slaps down the card and the console around it shimmers with multicolored lines running in circuits. The holographic projector towers start humming, and the monster appears: a giant, vicious-looking wasp.
Mammoth Graveyard is the skeleton of a woolly mammoth.
Killer Needle counterattacks, and destroys Mammoth Graveyard.
Yugi is starting to get scared.
Killer Needle's improved stats are 1560/1300.
Weevil's monster glows with light, and explodes.
He looks at his console; Yugi's lifepoints haven't changed, and Mammoth Graveyard's stats read 1560/1040-- the same attack points as Killer Needle!.
Hercules Beetle's stats rise immediately to 1950/2600.
Yugi's green, catlike, ferocious little Feral Imp grows a unicorn's horn, and its attack points rise to 2000.
Feral Imp shocks Hercules Beetle, but takes a hit in the chest and disintegrates.
Yugi's lifepoints fall to 1350.
The bystanders from earlier are still watching from the edge of the forest.
Yugi sets a monster.
Basic Insect's points rise to 650/910.
The former is a card that is formally known as "Laser Cannon Armor".
The laser cannon fires, and Yugi bows his head, letting the podium shield him. His Griffore is blown away.
He sets a defense mode monster.
Weevil places a facedown card.
Yugi quietly places a facedown card.
Yugi draws again.) .
Yugi draws again.
Yugi looks tense.
Yugi draws again. His card is the Dark Magician.
Yugi plays the card facedown, but says its name anyway.
At this point we also get a look at Weevil's card console; the five monster cards Weevil has on the field in this screen are Big Insect, Hercules Beetle, Basic Insect, Gokibore, and Saggi the Dark Clown. The last is definitely a continuity glitch, but it's there. As the bug prepares to attack, a facedown monster on Weevil's display of Yugi's field starts to flash red. Yugi tries not to blink.
The moment the bug commits to its attack, Yugi begins to chuckle; Weevil realizes with horror that he has just doomed himself to getting served.
The laser cannon fires, and Dark Magician appears, along with an iridescent shield of light that deflects the laser blast and refracts it into several lasers, that shoot back toward Weevil's field.
The bugs are incinerated. Weevil's lifepoints fall from a perfect 2000 to a meager 555.
As Weevil speaks, we see a wrinkled, pinkish cocoon, and hear wet, sloshy throbbing. This battle isn't over yet! Yugi grimaces, ready to keep on fighting. To Be Continued...
Weevil's side of the field is still steaming and smoking. Weevil himself is starting to sweat. Yugi's Dark Magician disappears once again from the field; it was in facedown defense mode, and I guess since the attack was deflected it went back to being that way. These days in the game, it wouldn't.
Téa is the first to turn around. Mai has shown up on the sidelines, and we can see behind her that the group of random bystanders has grown.
Téa seems to find Mai particularly annoying. As she fumes here, Joey looks at her with some concern.
Téa is still fuming; leave it to Mai to divide them!.
Weevil says this next line all too innocently.
Weevil's trap activates; it's a huge, nasty worm that goes straight for Kuriboh, who soaks up the attack and is destroyed. Other sites call this trap "Parasite Worm" {&}; in the English dub canon it's never named, and it's not a card in the TCG.
Yugi's lifepoints drop from 1350 to 1050.
Weevil flip-summons his monster, and its points are multiplied by a factor of 1.3 due to field power bonus, for a total of 650/520.
With an unpleasant squishing sound, the Larvae Moth begins to surround itself with silken strands. Only Weevil would think of it as beautiful; Yugi looks kind of grossed out, not to mention nervous.
The strands continue to build around Larvae Moth, as it twists and writhes. Soon, the strands begin to form into a hard, pinkish shell.
Gaia charges, both lances pointed at the cocoon, then stops short. His horse rears back, shying away from the huge cocoon.
Yugi's lifepoints fall to 750.
Joey is holding Téa back by the arms.
Weevil draws.
The card Yugi's looking at in his hand is [Beaver Warrior 1200/1500/L4/]. He sets a monster in facedown defense mode.
Both draw, and another turn passes.
As Mai glances up at Yugi, she sees him give the spectators a grin and thumbs-up.
Téa sticks her tongue out at Mai. Mai isn't watching; she's more interested in the duel.
Curse of Dragon breathes fire at the Cocoon; it bounces off, but lights up the ground around the cocoon.
Gaia strikes the Cocoon, and the blow resonates; it's a hit!.
Gaia's attack left a big, gaping hole in the side of the Cocoon-- but that icky squishing sound can still be heard. The bug in the Cocoon is still alive!.
The creature wails again, rising up on unsteady limbs.
The little green Larvae Moth has grown up. It's a big green moth as tall as a dueling podium and at least that wide. It has a yellowish horn and antennae, and a jewel-like red feature that may be its only eye. The wings have eye-mimicking patches in yellow and red.
Great Moth rises aloft and squares off against Curse of Dragon, who screams a challenge.
He slaps down a card.
This is the facedown defensive monster he set earlier.
The torrential winds swept up by Great Moth's wings obscure the field, hiding Gaia from view.
Gaia the Knight's new steed is Curse of Dragon, and together Yugi's two monsters are rising to a level opposite the Great Moth in the pollen-filled air.
As he watches, his dragon-mounted knight is losing points little by little.
Gaia's points are dropping below 2000 now, and no end in sight.
He looks at the card; it's just what he needed.
The field is suddenly in the midst of a torrential downpour.
The rust-colored disease that had been well on its way to coating the Dragon Champion rinses off in the rain.
The red "eye" on Weevil's Moth glints, and energy gathers between its thorax and legs. Yugi stops smiling and starts to look worried as the power grows, and is fired right at Gaia, obliterating both knight and dragon in a second.
It's true; Yugi's lifepoint counter now reads 50.
Behind him, Téa falls over laughing. Mai is not amused.
Téa, Joey, and Mai all look at Tristan; what did they miss?!.
They look up at Yugi. His eyes are closed, as though he's savoring some private joke.
Weevil does not like the sound of that at all) Yugi (Yami): ...Especially after spending so much time finding inventive ways to cheat! But if you thought bending the rules would help you in *this* match-- you're wrong.
A monster card zone on Yugi's field lights up, and the ground is instantly covered with roiling purple clouds. Summoned Skull rises from their midst, a tall and bulky demon with armor made of embedded bones.
Weevil appears to be trying not to look relieved.
Cutscreen; Weevil and Mai both gasp. Yugi's right; the mist still blankets the ground, and now and then a condensed droplet falls to the ground from Great Moth's wings.
Great Moth showers the field with water each time it flaps its wings, completely drenched.
Skull raises its face to the sky; sparks spread from its massive wings to cover its whole body, before shooting into the sky in one mighty bolt of lightning. A moment later, the swirling clouds return that bolt and more, crashing down on top of Great Moth as Weevil looks on in horror.
Great Moth explodes with a final cry. The spectators watch in awe. The field is in flames, and their glow flickers across Yugi's resolute face.
Great Moth is a singed, steaming mass lying on Weevil's side of the field, motionless.
Weevil's lifepoints are zero; he falls over, stupefied.) .
Mai stands there with her mouth open for a moment, then recovers, grudgingly impressed.) .
As Yugi approaches Weevil, he towers over him. Weevil is showing himself to be the worm his cards suggest.
Yugi palms the two star chips he has won from Weevil. Joey gets in Weevil's face, thoroughly terrifying him.
Weevil faints on the ground, and Joey removes Weevil's empty dueling glove.
The all look up, beyond the forest canopy, to the mountaintop above, on which sits the Castle Pegasus.
Beyond the treetops of Duelist Kingdom's forest, looms Castle Pegasus. Inside, Pegasus sits alone at the head of a banquet table.
He snaps a pocketwatch that he'd been looking at closed.
Joey punches his hand, optimistic.
Joey runs out to the edge of the cliff, as his friends dubiously watch.
Joey has jogged out to a grassy rise near the edge of the cliff; he turns and waves at them, grandstanding.
All three nearly groan aloud; so much for that.
Little Serenity lights up, and giggles. They turn and start walking up the road.
The two start running, they're so happy to be there together.
She looks over at Joey. He's taken off his sneakers, and tries to dip a foot in the water; the next wave swamps him, and he scampers away, clowning around. Serenity watches, giggling. Joey lies on the sand, a shoe in each hand, happily drying off.
Serenity looks up at him, afraid. Joey keeps building, keeping up a brave front for her sake.
Serenity eagerly leans forward and offers a pinky.
Joey hooks his own pinky around hers.
End flashback.
As he's stood there, Yugi, Tristan, and Téa have caught up, and all of them are having a quiet moment. Téa is the first to hear the noise, and points it out to the others.
The boys look where she's looking, and see duel arenas; three of them are visible, spaced across the landscape, and the tournament is in full swing.
Joey's confidence evaporates, and he falls over.
Just then, they overhear--.
The opponent walks away, crying into his sleeve. Mai laughs out loud, then gasps, spotting Yugi's group.
Mai's eyes glint; she has a nasty plan. Then she turns fake-friendly.
Téa is giving Mai the evil eye. Yugi answers with calm reserve.
Mai picks up Yugi's gloved hand and looks at the stars. Téa glares even harder.
Yugi looks up at Mai, whose eyes dare Joey to accept her challenge; then over to Joey, who is shaking with anger.
Joey is surprised out of it by Yugi's words, and turns to stare at him.
She turns goofy and her head fills with figurative air as she rattles off her reasons.
Joey looks at his hand for a moment.
Masaki's new stats are 1430/1430.
Mai closes her eyes and starts humming mystically.
Everyone is watching Mai; what on earth is she doing?! She has the five cards in her hand facedown on the surface in front of her, the area between the card zones and the edge of the table, and she's still humming to herself.
Joey looks pretty freaked out to hear this.
Yugi's watching all this carefully.
Harpie's Lady appears on the mountain portion of the field, with a loud caw. Her hands and feet are talons; blue, feathery wings sprout from the back of each arm; and she has a tail of blue feathers as well. Other than that, she is a light-blue-skinned, pretty, fierce lady with unnaturally red hair and skintight top and leggings.
Harpie's new totals are 1690/1820.
Joey's Swordsman draws his katana and rushes at the Harpie.
Joey's lifepoints fall to 1410.
A facedown card.
New stats are 1690/1430.
Harpie shrieks and slashes Tiger Axe; it evaporates. Joey's down to 1020 lifepoints, while Mai still has a perfect 2000.
Another facedown.
Joey sets a facedown monster.
Cyber Shield is glossy, metallic-maroon armor that raises Harpie Lady's points to 2190/2320. She caws, and dives with both clawed feet first onto Joey's set defense monster. It appears, looks like some kind of green-skinned warrior, TYG006_id1, but not for very long. It's destroyed, too.
In Arena #10 on one of the meadowy plains of Duelist Kingdom, surrounded by forest at a distance, Mai and Joey face off. Mai has Harpie's Lady on her field, and Joey's is empty. Yugi, Tristan, and Téa are the only ones standing close to the arena, but other bystanders are noticing the duel and milling about at a distance.
Joey is talking fast, half-muttered.
Joey is paralyzed with fear, angry and helpless.
Yugi frowns; he's going to set this straight. Once again, the mysterious Millennium Puzzle begins to glow, and shakes and sways on its own. Whether aloud or in his head, we'll never know, Yugi cries out--.
As the word is spoken, the voice speaking it grows deeper.  From a grey void appears swirling lines, strange symbols, rushing wind, and a column of blue-white light, in which there appears a figure. He's like Yugi, but isn't. He immediately takes charge of the situation.
The outline of a small golden eye glints on Yugi's forehead, as he adds--.
End flashback.
End flashback.
The pressure's starting to show; Joey's fighting back tears.
Joey closes his eyes, and it's as though he's standing alone in a void.
Baby Dragon is a cute little orange dragon, almost cartoony in appearance.
Harpie glows, and the glow splits into red, green, and blue; now there are three glowing blurs.
The first Harpie, with the red hair, is still here.
The second Harpie has purple wings and spiky blue hair.
The third Harpie has short, bright-orange hair and green wings.
Joey looks over at Yugi.
Yugi opens the box that once held the pieces of the Millennium Puzzle, in which he keeps his spare cards, and hands Joey one of them.
End Flashback.
Mai, meanwhile, is ignored throughout this deliberation, and is getting pretty tired of it.
Joey reaches for the top of his duel deck with a trembling hand; this is it.
Joey draws, and lifts the card...
The Time Wizard appears on the field, a round, red analog clock with eyeballs on its face and clock hands for a nose; white-gloved hands and purple-slippered feet; with yellow gears for shoulder clasps, from which hang his fuchsia cape; with another gear for the band of his hat, and two more for anklets; and carrying a little staff with a dial at the top.
Before our eyes, the air above Time Wizard begins to swirl inward on itself, and shoot out beams of green and red light.
Thousand Dragon is Baby Dragon, a thousand years old. His bright orange hide has turned more of an ochre or brownish-yellow, he's grown hair on his face, and his attitude is one of smug laziness, ready to pounce.
Then she sees that the Harpies are worn with age; their vivid hair is faded, and their faces are covered with wrinkles. They still look vicious, but they sit limply on the ground, too feeble and aged to fly.
Their attack points are now 1300 apiece; they've lost all their bonuses.
Joey still can't believe it.
Thousand Dragon takes flight, looming over the zombielike Harpies.
Thousand Dragon breathes fire, singeing the entire field. Mai looks slightly ill, watching as her Harpies get toasted. Joey is confident and resolute. Mai's lifepoints go straight from 2000 to 0, and Joey still has 1020 left.
Yugi winks and gives Joey a thumbs-up.
Mai is leaning on her hands against the card console, completely floored.
For once, Mai is speechless, listening intently, shocked into taking him seriously.
Yugi nods, and the Puzzle glows again. The timider, gentler Yugi has returned, and is no less proud.
Joey stands atop the dueling podium, two fingers up in a victory sign; and Yugi can tell that Serenity has won along with him.
They watch Joey polish the star chips with his sleeve, with childlike glee at his first major-league duel victory.
Tristan holds up a book.
They are less than enthusiastic.
He points down the path, then dashes off in that direction, leaving the other three standing there dumbfounded. Through the trees in that direction, can be seen the sparkling ocean.
Joey jumps up and runs toward the campfire. The other three gasp at his audacity.
He hurries off toward the fish.
Tristan folds his arms.
And Tristan demonstrates who those people might be, as he vaults over the rocks and runs after.
Téa lets out a gusty sigh; these are her goofy friends...
Joey and Tristan are seated at the fire, getting ready to chow down on one skewer each.
A tanned, muscled, bare-chested man wearing cutoff jeans, a diving mask on his head, and a duel glove, carrying a harpoon, and soaking wet, climbs over the edge of the top of the cliff, just in time to see Joey and Tristan about to start munching, while Yugi and Téa watch dubiously from the other side of the fire.
The four have noticed the stranger standing at the edge of the cliff.
A wave crests the cliff, and lands right on top of him. When it's gone, he's disappeared. Yugi and the gang are watching all this, a bit nonplussed.
The disgruntled fisherman climbs back up the cliff, even more disgruntled now that his big entrance has been ruined.
Yugi notices the duel glove as the fisherman shakes his fist at Joey.
Mako is startled out of his rage by Yugi's respectful question.
Téa notices something and starts giggling. Mako is again surprised and annoyed to have his big dramatic moment ruined.
She points out an adorable little pink octopus crawling all over Mako's diving goggles.
He flings the octopus back over the cliff. Joey and Tristan cry out.
Joey and Tristan look sadly over the edge of the cliff.
Mako turns back to Yugi.
They dash over in the blink of an eye.
They start munching on the fish skewers; Tristan is crying with joy.
Mako himself is chomping into a skewer just as voraciously.
Yugi and his friends are standing up, getting ready to leave.
Mako's harpoon glints on the ground where he left it. He picks it up.
Mako throws his harpoon, and it lands at Yugi's feet, point embedded into the rock. Yugi is terrified at the close miss.
Mako looks at his duel glove; it has three star chips in it.
The Millennium Puzzle begins to glow, and shakes and sways on its own. Whether aloud or in his head, we'll never know, Yugi cries out--.
Joey, Tristan, and Téa look nervous; Yugi himself seems to be weighing the situation. The duel podia fold out of the arena and lock into place, and the holographic towers light up. Yugi takes the blue podium, across from Mako atop the red one.
Each takes two stars from his glove and places them on the table. Mako watches Yugi with a savage grin on his face, his fierce, grey eyes lit with excitement.
Both duelists start with 2000 lifepoints.
He places a card on the table in attack mode, and something appears under the water. There's a glowing patch on the ocean side of the field, coming from something lurking below.
Below the water, the tentacled beast is eyeing Yugi through the water, ready to pounce.
Fiend Kraken is a giant squid, the monster that was hidden underwater. Its tentacles reach up from the surface of the water, tan with bright red suckers, and wrap around Horn Imp, picking it up--.
The great sea monster Fiend Kraken has one tentacle wrapped around each of Horn Imp's limbs, and a few around its middle, holding it high in the air, helpless.
Kraken squeezes, and Horn Imp breaks up into shards, defeated. The tentacles wave triumphantly.
The look on Yugi's face suggests that he doesn't agree. This is *not* good.
Yugi's lifepoints fall to 1740. This means that Kraken's field-powered attack points are 1560.
This monster is set facedown in defense position.
From the depths, there can be heard a strange squealing cry.
Yugi's little green Feral Imp starts sparkling all over with electricity, and roars, becoming even more feral and nasty than before. It is now 2000 attack points strong.
Feral Imp shoots a bolt of lightning at the water. A spinning column of water emerges from the surface where it hits.
The giant Jellyfish Mako played earlier rises and hovers above the water.
Jellyfish sinks back underwater again.
Several tentacles shoot from the waves, and lift Feral Imp into the air, squeezing.
Feral Imp shatters into shards of green; another monster down. Yugi seems to be trying to keep it together, as the tentacles once more sink beneath the waves.
Yugi's lifepoints now stand at 1480.
Full Moon is a magic card, standardly known as "Mystical Moon"; the full moon appears above Yugi's field, and Silver Fang, a fearsome wolf, howls to it.
Pronounced here kah-REE-oh-sheen.
Kairyu-Shin is a gigantic sea serpent. It appears amid the waves, creating new ones with its presence, and roars.
Tableau. Kairyu-Shin's waves are a force of nature, not merely an attack, and Silver Fang howls as he is bowled over.
The waves crash against Yugi's dueling podium, showering him with seafoam. It's far too late. In Mako's usually-cheerful face can be seen a glimmer of the ocean's unsparing cruelty, the subtle, menacing threat of a watery grave.
All that's left of the land side of the field is a little island in one of the monster card zones, surrounded by ocean.
Yugi pronounces it KAIR-yoo-sheen.
Yugi is startled, realizing Mako is speaking personally.
Mako leans on the duel console, putting down his hand of cards for a moment.
In this flashback, Mako looks no older than about thirteen, probably younger. We recognize him immediately, for his hair is much the same as it is now. On a small, white fishing boat in the middle of the ocean, no land or other boats in sight, Mako and his dad pull a rope, and whatever's on the other end, probably a net or the boat's anchor, aboard.
Mako wasn't really gripping the rope anymore, his eyes riveted on the tower of dark clouds that quickly left the horizon, overtook them, and turned their sparkling paradise into a stormy seascape of choppy waves.
Approaching fast was a huge tidal wave. Mako's dad tied him to the mast of the ship.
Tableau. The huge tidal wave towered over the tiny boat.) FB Young Mako and Mako's dad: Who-o-o-a-a-a!!.
End Flashback.
Yugi listens quietly, equally grave. The spectators are silent, worried.
He clenches his fist, and declares fiercely--.
Mako smiles a bit at that, then grins outright, delighted at the challenge.
face-up defense mode.
Giant Soldier of Stone's improved stats are 1690/2600.
Mako blinks, and his eyes go wide with understanding; what's Yugi about to do?!.
Stone Soldier stands from its kneeling defense position; Mako looks up at it, shocked and surprised.
Yugi points directly upward as Stone Soldier draws his stone sword, very slowly.
Mako does a double-take, realizing what that would mean. He can't believe it.
Stone Soldier takes aim, reaches up, and stabs the moon. It explodes. Loud noise, bright light. Mako flinches away, hiding his face.
When Mako looks at the field again, moon-gravel is raining into the field's ocean, which is moving rapidly.
Kairyu-Shin, Great White Terror, and Fiend Kraken lie on the land field around Stone Soldier's feet, gasping helplessly.
Curse of Dragon incinerates the landscape, and all of the fish along with it.
Mako flicks something off his own nose, and winks, grinning.
Back on the shore, the duel arena has disappeared.
Yugi and Mako clasp hands; they are friends, and rivals, now.
Mako's stomach grumbles audibly.
Mako takes a running jump off the cliff, into the ocean, as he yells--.
He lands in the ocean and swims away, still laughing. Joey, Tristan, and Téa are nonplussed.
Téa, Joey, and Tristan laugh. They turn and start walking away.
As they walk away, Yugi glances back one more time at the sea beyond the edge of the cliff.
Everyone laughs.
Mid-day on the island of Duelist Kingdom. At the top of a tall Castle Pegasus tower, someone lowers a rope of tied-together sheets out the window. This kid, disguised with a purple ski cap and a bandanna over his nose and mouth, looks out the window, glancing around for anyone watching, hoists himself up onto the windowsill, and starts carefully climbing down his makeshift rope, escaping from the tower. It's all going well, until he reaches the end of the last sheet.
He looks down. He's still high, high above the forest. His vision focuses and unfocuses with vertigo. He starts to sweat.
A knot in the sheets begins to pull apart. He looks up, feeling it slip, and watches it unravel. He falls, still clinging to the sheet, and lands in the forest below, breaking his fall with a dozen tree branches on the way down. .
He lands with a thud and crawls out of the bushes, rubbing his backside in pain.
Then he notices the sheet tied to a bedpost and hanging out the window.
He hurries over and looks down at the rope of sheets.
Sunlight streams through the tall windows, their curtains, with rich, blue fabric trimmed with gold, all pulled aside. Pegasus is sitting alone at a massive banquet table, with a small, fancy plate of cheese wedges, a bowl of fruit, and a wineglass. He takes a sip, and keeps laughing. Just as we're beginning to wonder what dreadful deed he could be gloating over, we glance over his shoulder and see that he's holding a comic book. He keeps chuckling heartily.
He looks down at the next panel, and chortles to himself, continuing to read.
Pegasus stops in mid-laugh, clearly annoyed at being interrupted.
Pegasus picks up a remote control and presses a button. A video monitor descends from the ceiling halfway down the table.
The monitor displays a map of the island, and opens several small windows showing video footage of individual arena duels.
The computer opens another window showing a rowboat at the pier filled with about a dozen people, overseen by Kemo.
The next window is a front and side view of Yugi, with scrolling text.
Croquet walks out, and Pegasus nonchalantly picks up his comic book again.
end Flashback.
They just heard a scream. Everyone startles and looks around.
Down the path, Kemo, one of Pegasus' goons in charge of the tournament, has a young duelist in a chokehold and is dragging him away. The young duelist is yelling and screaming.
Tristan lunges for Kemo, cocking back a fist.
Tristan punches at Kemo, who's holding a young tournament duelist in a chokehold, as the kid keeps yelling for help.
As Tristan approaches, Kemo tosses the kid aside; Tristan grabs Kemo by the arm and throws him.
As Kemo flies through the air, he turns ninja; he flips over and uses the momentum to kick off from the ground and delivers a flying kick. Tristan falls to the ground, winded.
The kid tries to scamper away, but Kemo grabs him by the arms.
Tristan gets up, rubbing his head.
He tosses the kid into the rowboat, where he slams right into Weevil Underwood, and tosses his backpack onto his lap. Weevil rudely shoves him to the other side of the bench.
Intimidated, the kid stays away from Weevil, and sighs...
The kid turns to look; Yugi and his friends are running up the path toward the boat.
Kemo folds his arms, getting between Yugi and the boat.
Tristan punches his palm.
Yugi runs over to an arena with 146 stamped on the side, and sits down on the ground.
The masked kid leaps out of the bushes.
Everyone stands up again, ready for anything.
The kid digs the stars from his pocket and scatters them on the console. As the more confident Yugi intently regards his opponent, the outline of a glowing golden eye shimmers on his forehead.
Mokuba opens the door to Seto Kaiba's office; he's sitting at his desk, with a metal briefcase open in front of him, listlessly flicking through a deck of cards.
Kaiba stops flicking through the deck, and glares at it helplessly, as though wishing he could burn a hole right through the center of it with his eyes.
Kaiba tosses the deck on the desk, letting it scatter.
Kaiba is shaking; he closes his eyes, ruefully.
Mokuba speaks bracingly, but also as a kid who can't understand why his hero is upset and moping.
Kaiba stares down at the desk; he's feeling all the agony of defeat anew, combined with fear and confusion.
Mokuba blinks, puzzled and sad.
Kaiba pulls a card from his blazer and looks at it.
Kaiba throws the card to Mokuba, who catches it.
Kaiba walks out of the office and closes the door.
Kaiba doesn't hear; Mokuba is left standing alone in the office, one hand half-raised in entreaty, looking lost.
End flashback.
As its name suggests, Man-Eating Plant is a gigantic, vicious venus flytrap with long, thorny vines and bright pink petals.
Winged Dragon is a relatively small blue dragon, but still plenty tough.
Winged Dragon counterattacks, and Man-Eating Plant is lost in a blaze of fire. Mokuba flinches away, then turns back to the field, surprised.
Mokuba's lifepoints fall to 1400.
Yugi has closed his eyes, and the golden third eye has appeared on his forehead again.
He opens his eyes, and speaks to his opponent.
Pegasus sits in a dark room with a bunch of shadowy executives; we don't see their faces. Pegasus alone is in spotlight, the focus of the meeting.
Behind Pegasus, a door cracks open; Mokuba is eavesdropping. KaibaCorp's sleazy board of directors, known as the Big Five, all seem to speak as one, in hoarse, raspy, whispery voices.
Mokuba, listening at the door, gasps.
As Pegasus speaks, he looks at the doorway out of the corner of his eye; he knows Mokuba's there. Mokuba slowly backs away from the door, ready to leave before he *really* gets found out.
Outside the door, Mokuba tries to run away, and runs straight into Kemo, who towers over him with a grin that's nothing short of evil.
Mokuba is brought into the board room, struggling futilely against Kemo's grip.
Mokuba keeps raving and struggling in the background, as Pegasus ignores him and addresses the Big Five.
End Flashback.
Winged Dragon counterattacks, and Krokodilus is destroyed. Mokuba's lifepoints fall to 1100.
Joey whaps himself on the head.
Téa sighs; these silly guys...
Yugi turns back to Mokuba-- and there's nobody there.
Mokuba comes up behind Yugi, jumps up on his dueling platform, and swipes at the star chips on the console on the 'aagh', managing to grab two.
He jumps down and starts running. Téa, Joey, and Tristan start to run after.
Mokuba stops, glancing back over his shoulder uneasily at Yugi. Tristan, Téa, and Joey stop short of grabbing him.
Mokuba turns away, trying to convince himself that Yugi's wrong, that he should take the stars and run. He can't. He turns back to face Yugi.
Inside, Kaiba sits at a desk with a big, beige computer monitor on one side of him and an open briefcase on the other. Computer cables crisscross the floor.
As Yugi glares back at Kaiba, Tristan and Téa run on either side of grandpa's gurney at the hospital.
End Flashback.
Kaiba breaks off his train of thought at the sound of pounding on the door. Someone shouts through the door.
Kaiba places the two disks in the briefcase and closes it, right before the two thugs burst into the room.
Kaiba stands and faces them, undaunted.
Then Kaiba makes his move. He kicks the big office chair he was sitting in so it flies right into the two goons and knocks them over.
Kaiba grabs the briefcase, turns and runs for the window next to the desk. We hear him crash through as the two goons regroup.
The goons run to the ruined window and look down. The ocean is a good fifty feet or more below them, choppy and studded with sharp rocks.
They turn back to the desk; Kaiba's deck is still sitting between the toolbox and the computer. One of the goons flips the top card-- Blue-Eyes.
Waves crash against the cliffs of Duelist Kingdom as Yugi, Mokuba, Joey, Tristan, and Téa run for the pier.
Yugi has just spotted the rowboat of disqualified duelists, already sailing away.
They run up to Kemo, watching the boat leave from the end of the pier. He doesn't even turn around.
Mokuba runs up to Kemo, holding out his handful of stolen star chips.
Kemo callously slaps Mokuba's hand aside, causing him to drop all seven of the star chips he was holding.
And all seven star chips fall into the water, and sink instantly.
Kemo grabs Mokuba in a chokehold, to the shock of Yugi and friends.
Mokuba struggles and gasps out a plea for help.
Kemo is standing beside the arena, still easily carrying Mokuba by the neck under one arm.
Yugi looks at the person waiting atop the red podium, and gasps aloud. The individual atop the podium resembles Seto Kaiba, except for the fact that he seems to radiate darkness. His eyes are strangely blank, unnaturally shadowed.
Yugi and friends look at 'Kaiba' with unnerved horror; they can't believe it!.
The 'ghost' speaks, in a sort of sinister monotone.
To Be Continued...
Ravens take flight from the trees around Arena 146 as Kemo laughs, still restraining Mokuba by the wrist.
Yugi and his friends gasp in horror; no way!.
Yugi is stiff, angry; just the idea that Kaiba might be dead has already gotten under his skin, as has the possibility that he himself is partially to blame, and the ghost knows it.
The impostor is staring straight at Yugi.
Yugi looks furious, frustrated; despite the fact that he's an impostor, they both know that what he's saying is true.
And the duel is on.) Ghost Kaiba: Guess I'll go first. Huh! And I'll start off with the Hitotsu-Me Giant! .
Dark Magician exerts his magical power, turning everything briefly its opposite color, like a film negative; Hitotsu-Me Giant breaks down in pieces. The ghost is down to 700 lifepoints.
The ghost is condescending, assured. Yugi grimaces; that he's so confident after just having lost over half his lifepoints in one attack is not a good sign.
Kaiba Manor, day. The instrumental intro to the song "I'm Back" plays as we set the scene.  A pair of suited guards stand before the gates, oblivious to the figure behind a tree on the front lawn; It's Kaiba, the real Kaiba, with his metal briefcase.
The thugs looked out and saw the frothing sea and sharp rocks below; they didn't notice that Kaiba was gripping the ledge by his fingertips, and once they left, he pulled himself back up.
A little red bar fills up on the screen as the computer verifies the voice pattern. Once it's certain, the computer speaks less formally, and Kaiba's startup graphic shows on all the bigger screens around the room. In total, there's a screen only slightly larger than your average desktop monitor right in front of Kaiba, and screens only slightly larger than your average big-screen TV on the walls ahead of him and on either side. We don't see the wall near the door or the other two consoles, though there are two more chairs.
The big screen in front of Kaiba shuts off for a moment, as if the computer has decided not to talk to him, then the screen starts tiling smaller images of the startup graphic. At this point it's a bit much. Kaiba replies with an air of long-suffering toward his excessively chatty and cheerful computer.
Over the last line, the big screen has shown an image of the KaibaCorp Headquarters building, then switched to an incomprehensible 3D readout with a fluctuating bar graph, line graph, and circle chart, and several pairs of letters, arranged in a sort of ellipse: LD, AL, KS, PC, B5, B5, CO, AL, KS, PC.
The screen changes to show an aerial view of the island of Duelist Kingdom, a small picture of Pegasus, and a window containing green text against a black background.
Kaiba looks up at the monitor, the color in his face washed out by the glow of the computer screens.
End Flashback.
Kaiba listens in openmouthed shock. It's even worse than he imagined. In his mind's eye he sees Mokuba straining futilely to escape two suited thugs, who each grip one of his arms, while a phantom Pegasus looms over, looking on with sinister glee.
End vision.
Beat. Kaiba makes a tough decision.
The ghost turns the card around and shows it-- it's a Blue-Eyes White Dragon! Yugi gasps, shocked and horrified; it can't be!) .
He slaps down the card, and the ground of the field shimmers with light. The Blue-Eyes White Dragon appears, roaring its telltale roar. Yugi can't believe his eyes.
Mokuba is stunned; with the appearance of Blue-Eyes, his brother has been all but pronounced dead.
Blue-Eyes roars at Dark Magician, and Yugi anxiously faces it down.
The Blue-Eyes White Dragon, with 3000 attack points and 2500 defense, roars as it faces off against Dark Magician, with 2500 attack and 2100 defense.
Yugi's not going to dignify that.
Yugi stares down the situation; what's he going to do?.
The map of Duelist Kingdom on the big screen is overlaid with several rectangles, possibly designating regions of the island for formatting the dueling field terrain. A star blinks at the center of each rectangle.
A loading bar appears on screen. Kaiba watches it fill up with a satisfied smile.
A circle-slash with Funny Bunny the pink cartoon rabbit appears on the screen.
Kaiba stands, urgent.
Kaiba sits back down, resigned; this is going to be a bit tougher.
Kaiba starts typing on the keyboard in front of him.
As he works, a diagram appears on the screen. Three boxes: the map of Duelist Kingdom, an orbiting satellite, and the skyscraper that is Industrial Illusions' Headquarters. A blinking green line travels from the first box up to the second, then from the second down to the third.
A window appears onscreen that contains an image of the Dark Magician card.
The image of the satellite blows up to fill the whole screen, then breaks down into a schematic blueprint.
The screen zooms in, rapidly and roughly, as it follows the progress of the satellite-- BOOM!.
He places a facedown card.
This card is more commonly known as "Stop Defense".
Kaiba's screen shows a diagram of a duel; blue has 1300 and one monster in attack mode, and red has 800 and two monsters of the field. The virtual door of field 530 closes and Kaiba keeps moving.
They glide down a virtual hallway, and reach the door at the end.
As they move toward the virtual door, the picture blurs and noises, as though they've hit an energy barrier.
Kaiba waits the long moments for the computer to restart itself.
The screen again tries to zoom in on the door to field 146, and the result is static and a flash of white light.
Kaiba types on the manual keyboard; a window comes up on his screen containing an image of the Dark Magician card, X'ed out, and an "ok" button.) Kaiba: Gotcha. Just as I thought. So. A virus. A *good* one. That means-- just one thing! Searching for Yugi's cards activates the virus! Yugi's inside-- get ready to go in!.
A graphic of three sticks of TNT appears on the screen with a quick-filling loading bar.) .
Boom!.
When the dust clears, the screen shows a castle across an expanse of sparkling water, looking almost like a mirage.
Screen zooms in on the thick iron door.
Yugi is sweating. This is really not good.
Téa, Tristan, and Joey are touched, surprised; Mokuba is actually saying these things about *Kaiba*! Tears are showing at the edges of Mokuba's eyes as he pleads.
Four top hats appear on the monster zones of Yugi's field, each one with a checkered hat band and a yellow question mark on the front.
A sparkling white blaze sizzles across the field  and strikes one of Yugi's four magical hats. Yugi ducks, then when the blaze recedes, straightens up with a smile.
He places a facedown card.
The middle hat is obliterated in a stream of blinding white light. The air crackles where the hat once sat. The devious grin on Yugi's face clearly says that Ghost Kaiba made the wrong choice!) Yugi (Yami): Well, *now* you've done it-- activated my trap card, that is!.
The ground under the hat crackles more, and a shimmering design is glowing on the floor of the arena. The crackling electricity builds, and fires a burst at Blue-Eyes.
When the sparking ball hits, it surrounds Blue-Eyes with a sort of dome of blueish fog. Ghost Kaiba growls under his breath.
Blue-Eyes' strength has now decreased from 3000 to 2300.
Dark Magician appears from the hat in the center of the field-- of the two, the one on Yugi's left-- and leaps into the air; his attack points are still at their full 2500. Blue-Eyes, trapped under the vale of blue, can't move. Dark Magician raises his staff high, and blows Blue-Eyes away, singlehandedly.
Yugi still has 1000 lifepoints, and he's coming back from the brink of losing. Ghost Kaiba's lifepoints fall to 500.
Kemo grabs Mokuba's shoulder, being sure to keep ahold of him.
Yugi nods back, and turns to face the 'ghost' again.
Kaiba's computer screen shows a virtual hallway, and a door marked 146. Computer monitors are the only light in the room, uplighting his face with their pallid glow. He's wearing a headset.
The screen changes to show a diagram of the current duel. Text above the chart of the field reads, in blue, "YUGI MUTO"; in green, "VS"; and in red, "SETO KAIBA". The left-hand side of the field has Blue-Eyes in attack mode and Defense Paralysis faceup in the spell/trap zone. The right-hand side contains a monster card in attack mode and a card faceup in the spell/trap zone; this is an apparent continuity glitch, because Yugi currently has no cards in play. Next we see a diagram of the Blue-Eyes White Dragon hologram.
Close in on the text "YUGI MUTO VS SETO KAIBA".
This new revelation has hit Kaiba hard; how dare an impostor challenge Yugi claiming to be him!.
A diagram of the Blue-Eyes appears on the small screen in front of Kaiba.
Lights start to flash on the screen.
The screen shows a percentage counting up from 49% into the 50%'s, then 60%'s. Kaiba all but holds his breath, clenching his teeth, as he watches the number.
The screen shows Blue-Eyes' attack points-- still a solid 3000.
Blue-Eyes has begun to spring leaks; thin beams of light are shooting from under its scales, and the ground beneath it is glowing. The pixels phase in and out. It roars, confused.
On Kaiba's screen, the Blue-Eyes diagram is overlaid with a fill of red, presumably representing the virus' spread. More importantly, the attack points are plummeting from 3000, down into the 2900's.
The pixels phase again, and Blue-Eyes' wings begin to melt, as though made of plastic and placed in an oven. It's streaming light from every direction.) .
Yugi's friends watch in stunned awe; Mokuba all but cheers out loud, hardly daring to believe his eyes.
Pegasus is indeed watching, on the monitor over his banquet table, with Croquet standing at his shoulder.
Kaiba's computer shows Blue-Eyes' attack to be in the 2400's.
Suddenly the picture on Kaiba's screens poleaxes, laced through with zigzaggy static.
Funny Bunny, a pink cartoon rabbit in red suspenders, walks out into the middle of Kaiba's big, poleaxed screen, immune to whatever crashed it, and starts dancing dopily and waving at him.
More and more overlapping Funny Bunnies appear, clowning across the frozen screens, mocking his fear at the fact that only one individual could be behind a hacking like this.
Pegasus sits at the banquet table alone, and calmly swishes the red juice in his wineglass, then sips.
Yugi gasps, stricken; this is it!.
Kaiba pounds his fists on the console, in a moment of blind desperation, and his voice seems to echo.
The blast approaches, enveloping Yugi in an ocean of white lightning...
The melting-Blue-Eyes prepares to attack...
Kaiba pounds both fists on the computer desk, in a moment of blind desperation, and his voice seems to echo.
The attack lets loose, then, having filled the air around Yugi, suddenly dissipates. The air is sparkling faintly; Feral Imp is unharmed, as is Yugi himself.
Blue-Eyes is now halfway melted away; we can almost see its bones. It's phasing and cutting out more every second. It glows brightly as though destroyed, and is gone.
He has just heard a beep. The lock on the door flashes a red light. Someone on the other side is trying to get in. It flashes and beeps again.
The duelist opposite Yugi shudders all over, clutching his own head, then, lifts his head and raves out loud.
As he speaks, his arms swell and burst his sleeves, his chest expands and shreds the blue uniform-suit he was wearing, and his face and neck bulge and bubble, then finally burst apart, revealing a different persona entirely. This new character is bulbous and fat, with small eyes and a wide, toadlike mouth. His hair, what little of it there is, is pink, and sticks out from the side of his bald head like a clown's.
The thing that recently pretended to be Kaiba laughs, his new voice repellent and harsh. He now wears a purple cape with a huge collar.
End Flashback.
Croquet, still standing at Pegasus' back, is growling into the other radio.
Pegasus looks back up at the screen, which shows an aerial view of Duelist Kingdom, overlaid with eight different smaller images. The biggest of these is a live feed of Yugi's duel, and one must wonder how the camera is this close to Yugi without Yugi's having noticed. The other seven images are feeds or images of locations elsewhere on the island.
We hear Pegasus speak, and Kemo turns his head, as though listening; he probably has an earpiece that we don't see.
Grappler is a purple sort of lizard warrior. It growls up at Yugi.
Yugi looks at the Celtic Guardian monster card he just drew.
Celtic Guardian is an armored elf, with pointy ears and purple markings on his cheeks. He wields a sword. As soon as he's summoned, he leaps high into the air, and brings down his sword; Grappler is slit in two.
Mystical Elf appears on the field, a strawberry-blonde, light-blue-skinned maiden wearing a flowing, floor-length green dress, her hands clasped before her and eyes closed. She quietly sings her prayer in an elven tongue. With that powerup, she has 1100 atk and 2300 defense points.
Indeed, he is holding up the third and final Blue-Eyes. It takes the field, roaring.
Mokuba tries to fight back tears-- but how can Yugi win now?!.
The blast strikes a prismatic shield that has appeared in front of Mystical Elf, and the shield shines with the contained blast.
The bolts of light from Mirror Force seem to strike an invisible barrier in front of Blue-Eyes and vanish.
This magic/spell card is more commonly known as "Monster Reborn".
Blue-Eyes' new attack total is 4100.
A symbol in the shape of an eye appears on Yugi's forehead, shimmering in multicolors.
Yugi extends a hand, exerting some unseen power, and, with one last exclamation of surprise, his opponent turns colors like a film negative, shatters, and is blown away into the bright yellow light. The presence that banished him is standing strong, silhouetted in the light as the wind whips at his jacket and hair, the Millennium Puzzle blazing against his chest, the multicolored eye shimmering on his forehead, and his eyes glowing pure white. He speaks.
The screen cuts out. Pegasus looks down at his hand, still molded in the shape of the wineglass, then up at the screen. He is no longer pleasantly entertained. Once again, we glimpse the sinister villain behind the facade, and glimpse the golden Millennium Eye between locks of Pegasus' hair.
He looks around; Kemo and Mokuba are nowhere in sight.
Pan out from the field, across the bare, packed earth. They are the only ones anywhere near.
The sun setting over Duelist Kingdom turns the sky purple and pink, and the ocean water glimmers like amber.
Yugi, Tristan, Joey, and Téa meet in a forest clearing from four different directions.
All four turn and look at the distant castle, silhouetted against the sunset.
Yugi and Joey look up at the castle, resolute; then Joey ruins the moment when he notices something on the ground.
Joey's spotted a bunch of cards scattered around their feet. He reaches for them.
Joey picks up a card, Tristan swipes it away, grinning sheepishly at Yugi.
He flicks through his deck, until he finds a green monster that looks just like the red one he picked out of Tristan's cards.
Yugi and Téa laugh.
At Field 33, Mai is finishing off a nervous young duelist, looking rather bored and put-out.
They do, all three at once, and the duel is over. We briefly catch a glimpse of the duelist's monster, but I can't identify it: TYG011_id1. Mai inspects her fingernails.
Gazing into the clouds, she gets her answer; a vision of Joey, smiling at her. Mai sits up, frustrated.
Mai has just realized that she isn't alone. She turns.
End flashback.
Mai holds up her own glove and turns her wrist, whistling as though quite bored with a mere five. Only two slots on her glove are empty.
Mai gets to her feet, hands on her hips.
Even Yugi can't keep from laughing quietly. Both Tristan and Téa laugh out loud. Joey is not amused.
Joey turns around and yells at his friends.
Joey stops dead, midsentence, but doesn't turn around.
He turns around. It's Mai.
Rex walks out from behind a nearby cliff, carrying his bag slung over a shoulder and looking smug.
Joey's friends gasp.
Mai, watching with satisfied amusement, gasps suddenly; and even she looks upset. Yugi and Téa gasp. Tristan, now on the ground, wipes dirt off his face with a sleeve.
Joey's standing over him, resolute and angry.
Tristan stands, incensed and glaring at him.
*That* gets Joey's attention, but he doesn't show it.
Tristan bitterly strides away.
Joey puts a hand up to stop Téa.
Right on cue, a duel arena with a 45 on the side appears out of the ground behind him, causing a localized earthquake. The podia and projectors unfold, and it's ready for another duel.
Joey is already riding the platform to the top of the blue dueling podium.
Joey is so angry at that he briefly appears to be on fire.
End Flashback.
Both duelists start with 2000 lifepoints.
He runs off before Téa can ask why.
Joey glances over and notices that Yugi's gone; Téa's looking for where he went, hands primly on her hips.
King Rex lifts one giant dino foot and stomps Joey's Baby Dragon. It makes a pitiful squeak and is gone.
Joey is starting to sweat.
King Rex's new stats are: 2080/1580.
All that can be seen of Leogun under King Rex's foot is its tail sticking out. Joey's lifepoints fall to 1670. He's starting to look scared.
Axe Raider appears on the field, and his points read 2210/1495.
Axe Raider swings his axe, and King Rex is dusted. Rex watches his lifepoints subtract with mild shock.
Sword Arm of Dragon's improved stats are 2275/2630.
Axe Raider is thrown backward, then 'poofs' suddenly into motes of dust. Joey's down to 1605 lifepoints.
Joey looks over at her.
Tristan stands, his hurt feelings forgotten.
Tristan grabs Yugi by the front of his shirt and lifts him off the ground.
Tristan glances back at Yugi then looks away again.
He places Time Wizard in a magic-and-trap zone space, as a facedown.
end Flashback.
Facedown defense mode, even though he names it.
Megazowler's raised stats are: 2340/2600.
As Megazowler charges, Rock Ogre appears; the large, orange triceratops hits Joey's carved stone soldier at full ramming speed, leaving gravel in its wake.
Flame Swordsman is a fusion monster, but here it's played as a normal monster.
Flame Swordsman's raised stats are 2340/2080.
Megazowler charges Joey's Flame Swordsman.
Flame Swordsman grunts, and his crystalline orange sword begins to flame. He meets Megazowler head-on and attacks it.
Megazowler goes up in flames and vanishes; Flame Swordsman beat it. Rex's lifepoints fall to 1330.
Another one, this one in face-up defense.
Flame Swordsman takes it down; next to fall is Rex's Crawling Dragon #2 {&}; then Uraby {&}. Joey is on a roll!.
Its raised stats are 2340/1950.
Rex draws, and gets a big grin on his face. This can't be good.
Serpent Night Dragon generates piercing, cutting arcs of sound, and blows Flame Swordsman away with ease. Joey's starting to sweat again.
Joey looks down at his hand, leaning against the console, then goes to draw a card.
He draws, and is neither overjoyed nor disappointed, just surprised. His card is Lava Battleguard, the card he borrowed from Tristan.
Inside an abandoned warehouse nearby, Joey is surrounded by seven thugs all wearing purple, with his back to the wall; he looks to be about the same age he is now. A little boy is cowering behind him. One of the thugs is speaking.
The kid notices the thugs are all paying attention to Joey, and runs and hides behind some machinery, watching the situation unfold with wide, frightened eyes.
The kid darts behind the machinery as Tristan shows up, soaked and dripping.
Joey looks away from the thugs.
The tension breaks and the showdown becomes a fight. The rest is a blur; several guys rush Tristan and Joey fights off several more.
Tristan offers a hand to help Joey to his feet. Joey slaps it away.
Joey stands up, not looking at Tristan.
Joey walks away; Tristan watches him go. Outside, the rain is starting again.
End Flashback.
Joey startles out of his thoughts and looks over at the sidelines; Yugi and Tristan are now standing beside Téa.
Yugi and Téa share a smile; Joey and Tristan are buds again!.
Both duelists watch the battle unfold, as the lights of explosions color the air blue and red; is Serpent Night Dragon really destroyed??.
It is. Rex's mighty Serpent Knight Dragon shatters into a million pieces.
Mai gasps; Téa, Yugi, and Tristan cheer.
Tristan replies with a thumbs-up and a smile.
Rex is down to 840.
Behind Rex rises the specter of a silhouetted black dragon, with glowing red eyes. Rex still has a trump card left to play...
Open in the middle of a duel in a holographic arena on the plains of Duelist Kingdom. Late sunset turns the clouds all shades of orange, pink, and purple. Joey has Lava Battleguard and Swamp Battleguard on the field, and Rex's field is empty.
Rex sets a monster in facedown defense position.
Lava Battleguard hits the facedown monster with his club,  and Trakodon is no more. The light from the explosion reflects onto Joey's awesome team of monsters.
Rex draws, and looks ready and able to dish out some payback.
Red-Eyes' improved attack points are 3000.
Red-Eyes breathes a big fireball, and both Battleguards are engulfed.
Tristan looks stricken. When the field clears of fire, it's also clear of both of Joey's monsters.
Joey's lifepoints fall to 235.
Mai keeps nagging, and it fades into the background as Rex keeps thinking.
Joey looks up from desperately trying to figure out his next move.
Mai and Rex keep arguing as, across the field, Joey is thinking through Rex's proposal.
Joey flips his Time Wizard card and slaps it down faceup on the field.
Time Wizard's spinner starts to spin. It's divided in six pieces; four skulls and two time warp crests. Joey's chances look to be about 50-50; the skull zones are smaller.
The Time Roulette keeps on spinning...
Rex watches it nervously; now he's the one sweating.
The arrow starts to slow down.
Time Wizard waves its scepter, now glowing with power, and speaks in a robotic voice.
The sky around the field changes color as Time Wizard points his scepter at Red-Eyes. A swirling vortex appears in the sky and a strong wind blows from it.  The spectators cower, as does Rex.
As Rex speaks, visions of distant or long-forgotten galaxies stream through the vortex. Glowing shapes of long-extinct creatures fly around the field in a maelstrom. Through the vortex also comes an ape, then a squat bipedal ape, then a more developed hominid, then a hominid with a stick, and finally, a human man, standing tall. Rex flinches away from the bright light. When he looks at the field again, he is aghast.
Mai breathlessly tries to deny it.
Despite Mai's unconvincing reassurances, Red-Eyes appears to have turned to stone.
Rex's command peters out as Red-Eyes's stone head falls off and smashes to the ground.
The rest of Red-Eyes collapses on itself.
Tristan's running straight toward him, Yugi and Téa jogging behind.
Joey and Tristan have been running toward each other throughout these lines, and right when they reach each other, Joey finds himself on the ground. Tristan stands over him smugly.
Joey jumps up, ready to fight.
Yugi and Téa are standing off to the side watching all this.
They watch, nonplussed, as Tristan and Joey grapple; Tristan is gripping Joey's nose, and Joey is stretching Tristan's cheeks, both of them growling unintelligible insults. They look ridiculous.
A bush rustles suspiciously along the path.
Somewhere in the bushes, a pair of eyes glows red. There may be more in these woods than that...
On a branch, an owl hoots softly, its eyes glowing with reflected moonlight.
Yugi, Joey, Tristan, and Téa are sitting on the ground under a nearby tree; Tristan's in the middle of telling a ghost story.
Joey jumps up.
Joey then spots a yellow mushroom with pink spots, sitting at the base of the tree.
Joey lunges toward it to take a bite right out of the top, and Tristan grabs him by the arms, holding him back as he keeps scrambling forward. Yugi and Téa walk over.
Joey stops struggling, and all four look; Mai has joined them.
She takes a candy bar out of her pocket and takes a bite, chewing with relish. Yugi, Joey, Tristan, and Téa all watch her, eyes wide, and simultaneously sniff the air.
Joey gapes, eyeing the candy bar; it's so tempting...
They all groan; she has a point.
Téa is a little startled; is Mai actually being friendly?.
In the shower, not much more than a tall tent, Téa is starting to unfasten her vest.
Joey reacts, goofy and flattered but still not sure he likes her after all she's put him through today.
Téa, hearing Mai talk about her friends that way, is uncertain.
Just then, something rustles on the side of the shower Mai isn't guarding.
Mai goes into the shower to help her; Téa's holding her towel around her and cowering to one side.
Mai pokes her head out of the far side of the shower; nothing there but bushes.
They eat for a moment.
Mai takes a sip of her soda.
Yugi looks slightly hurt; he was just trying to be friendly and give her a compliment.
The other four gasp, surprised at her sudden hostility.
Mai stands up and walks away from the campfire, down the path toward the sea. They watch her go.) Joey: Ugh, man, she can really ruin a meal!.
She looks forlorn and lonely. And she doesn't see the large, shadowy figure sneaking up behind her...
Mai, standing alone and lonely on a cliff beside the sea, never sees the large, shadowy figure sneaking up behind her until her mouth is covered with one massive, duel-gloved hand and she's dragged away into the forest, squeaking and struggling.
The bushes behind Téa rustle, and she screams. The boys are already on their feet to protect her, ready for a fight, watching the bushes continue to move.
Someone walks out of the bushes, but it isn't Mai. All four of them gasp.
Change flashback. Téa spots Bakura again, watching them from behind a tree near the stairs to the courtyard of the castle on the first morning of the tournament. End Flashback.
Bakura's smile seems a little restrained; he looks slightly troubled.
Yugi and Téa share a smile.
Joey shows them his Flame Swordsman card, then jumps up and pantomimes a sword swing.
Tristan jumps up.
Joey and Tristan cling together in terror, both showing huge grins.
He shows them his Dark Magician card.
The other three nod.
He shows them a spell card that depicts an angel, half dark and half light. The dark half has a giant bat wing, the light side a white, feathery one. She holds a heart before her chest, such that it's half in light, half in shadow.
Again we see that reserved, held-back smile from Bakura.
Joey turns away and doesn't notice that Bakura is looking more sinister by the moment. This time when he smiles, it's less restrained, but more malicious.
Bakura's tone has changed; Tristan blinks. The mild-mannered, self-effacing Bakura is speaking smoothly, assuredly, and his voice has dropped slightly in pitch.
Téa turns nervously to Yugi, who's staring at Bakura.
Bakura closes his eyes and seems to hum softly, holding his hands relaxed before his chest. The air begins to ripple and distort.
And it gets freakier; on Bakura's chest, as though having osmosed through his sweater, appears a circular golden pendant, about the size of one's hand, with five independently hanging points attached to its lower edge like beads. In the center of the circle is a pyramid with a familiar eye wrought upon it. It hangs from Bakura's neck by a cord.
Bakura's voice has become harsher, nastier. As he speaks, the forest around them blurs into dark-bluish clouds. The five of them are now standing or sitting around a tree stump in the middle of a strange void.
Yami Bakura is still speaking without moving his lips; telepathy, probably.
The Millennium Ring flashes, and Yugi gasps aloud as a double, a ghost, splits from him; we see it as a sort of film-negative, with the Yugi it split away from left in blue, rather than color. The same thing happens to Joey, then Tristan, then Téa.
The four 'ghosts' disappear into a swirling vortex, and four beams of light shoot into the deck Yugi placed on the tree stump. The four friends are motionless for a moment, then, never blinking or changing position, slump to the ground as though puppets with cut strings. Yami Bakura stands. This is no longer the nice guy they've been speaking to, this is someone entirely different.
He stands over Yugi; the Millennium Puzzle, unlike the rest of him, is still its normal golden color. Yami Bakura reaches for it. It shines, and he recoils, shielding his eyes.
The Millennium Puzzle is still shining brightly, and Yugi is no longer blue. He opens his eyes, and doesn't look too happy.
This is the other presence who takes over when Yugi duels, the strong, confident persona. He gets to his feet.
The tree stump between them has momentarily vanished, and they face each other across an open expanse of shadowy surface. The other Bakura has regained his confidence, maliciously gleeful.
The more confident, stronger Yugi, the persona who only reveals himself in a duel, and a more sinister version of Bakura face each other across a tree stump surrounded by shadowy darkness, while Tristan, Téa, and Joey lie unconscious on the ground. For a moment, both are silent.
Quite different from Yugi's quiet friend from school, Bakura's alter-ego snickers malevolently.
As he speaks, we glimpse a vision of seven objects, each made of gold, including Yugi's Millennium Puzzle and the golden ring that has appeared around Bakura's neck.
The other Yugi's eyes widen; he does remember, and this is not a good thing. The Millennium Ring around Bakura's neck shimmers with an inner light.
The other Yugi puts a hand to the Millennium Puzzle protectively.
Both duelists start with 2000 lifepoints; the tree stump has a game board for each of them.
A miniature of the Cyber Commander appears standing on the card placed on the table in faceup defense mode; but the little soldier looks very familiar-- it's Tristan, wearing the costume and carrying the gun of the Cyber Commander!.
Tristan looks at the rifle cradled in his arms, then around at the field.
He just turned around; he stands about as tall as one of Yugi's hands.
At the sight of Bakura's monster, Tristan is freaking out.
The White Magical Hat charges Tristan; for a guy in a top hat and a monocle, he's pretty scary.
The White Magical Hat has punched Tristan, and he disappears in a flash of red light.
And the other Bakura is quite enjoying this.
Over on the ground, the body of Tristan is still unconscious and cold...
He walks over to a tombstone and  brushes off the dust. It reads "TRISTAN TAYLOR".
Yugi grits his teeth and looks at his hand. It contains Breath of Light, Flame Swordsman, Skull Stalker {&}, Meotoko {&}, and Kagemusha of the Blue Flame.
The card glows, and Joey appears, wearing a huge helmet, orange-lacquered battle armor, and the rest of the gear of the Flame Swordsman, including a big, shimmering orange sword in his hand. He looks resolute, then surprised.
Joey smiles; if his friend needs him, that's all the motivation he needs.
Joey slashes and the White Magical Hat evaporates. Bakura's lifepoints fall to 1200, and he doesn't look happy about it.
Bakura's lifepoints now stand at 1200, Yugi's at 2000.) Yami Bakura: Rrrgh, your little Swordsman got lucky last time, Yugi; but not *this* time! .
Bakura slaps down a monster card-- in facedown defense position.
Bakura's card flips.
The Morphing Jar's face extends from the card with a squeal. Joey slices it right down the middle, yelling something unintelligible.
The card anticlimactically falls back onto the table.
Joey's immediately humbled.
Yugi grimly folds his hand and places it on the graveyard pile and draws a new one. Bakura does the same, watching Yugi's face as he sees his new hand. Yugi's cards are: Dark Magician, Happy Lover, The Furious Sea King {&}, Kageningen {&}, and one other normal monster, unidentifiable from the small portion we see of the card.
Bakura chuckles, as though he already knows what Yugi has just drawn. He plays his cards in rhythm with his words.
The card glows... and when the mighty spellcaster appears, he's a few feet shorter than usual. Yugi himself is wearing the armor and carrying the staff of the Dark Magician.
Usually known as "Monster Reborn". Atop this card, Tristan the Cyber Commander reappears.
All three of them turn to look up at the duelist who played them.
The more confident Yugi smiles approvingly, and nods.
Yugi attacks, and everything turns its opposite color for a split second; Bakura's facedown monster flips, and it's--.
And Yugi's attack destroys it.
The other Yugi, the duelist, places his hand in the graveyard pile.
The duelist Yugi re-draws his hand, and his fifth card is--.
The duelist Yugi sees the card and reacts with alarm.
The trap card generates a ghostly hand that reaches for the duelist Yugi and grips his face, shocking him; his lifepoints fall from 2000 to 500 in one blast.
The spectral hand releases his face, and duelist Yugi hunches over, badly shaking, a hand to his chest.
He's still clearly in a lot of pain; he opens an eye and answers Tristan in gasps.
Joey gulps. Big Yugi looks at his hand; along with Magician of Faith-- Basic Insect, Anthrosaurus, Rock Ogre Grotto #1, and Kagemusha of the Blue Flame.
She spots Yugi, Joey, and Tristan.
All three of the guys are freaking out at the sight of her.
They dash over and cluster around her, hiding her behind their backs.
She realizes that she's holding a sorcerer's staff with the top shaped like a crescent moon.
Yugi groans and falls over.
Yugi trains his staff on Bakura's facedown monster,  and it appears with a rather harmless squeak...
The duelist Yugi sees it and tries to stop him.
Bakura's monster shatters.
Big Yugi grimaces, and Bakura watches the field with amusement; both know what's about to happen. Yugi stands there, having successfully completed his attack, then feels a sudden shock. He gasps in pain and falls to his knees, shivering.
At that, Joey and Tristan frantically try to push Téa's card down to hide her.
Bakura places a monster facedown in defense mode. Téa nervously stands as all of them eye the card.) Téa/Magician of Faith: *Man*-Eater Bug? Glad I'm a girl.
Yugi is still paralyzed, and struggles to speak.
The other three turn and look; they're standing on the facedown trap.
Across the field, the Man-Eater Bug peeks out from under its card; all we can see is a pair of glowing red eyes.
Joey just hit him in the stomach with the hilt of his sword. Tristan moans and falls over.
Joey charges, then stops, standing on top of Bakura's facedown. He looks around, then raises his sword, about to stab it down through the card.
Then the card activates, and Joey's suddenly standing on the head of a giant insect. He flies into the air, thrown off, and lands ungracefully on its shoulders, using his sword to keep it from turning its head and biting him, trying to stay on its back. 'Big Yugi' watches, worried but somewhat stunned, as Joey the tiny Flame Swordsman grapples with the Man-Eater Bug.
The other Yugi hesitates, then seems to resolve himself to respect Joey's decision.
The ground around the bug's feet shines with light. Yugi struggles to his feet.
Both Joey and the Man-Eater Bug vanish. Yugi, Téa, and Tristan are devastated; Téa sobs.) Tristan/Cyber Commander: He's gone...! Just like that, my best buddy's gone! .
He looks around, sensing something, then sees it.
A specter in a long purple cloak, carrying a scythe and wearing a string of cards across its chest, is floating toward him on the wind.
He trips over a rock and falls in the dirt. He yells, watching helplessly as the Reaper closes in...
A tear falls,  and when it hits the ground it makes a ripple. Téa's card starts to glow, then so does she. Yugi turns around.
Téa is now shining like an apparition, giving off brilliant white light and dazzling sparkles of glitter. She looks completely shocked at her own strength.
The magic glow from Téa siphons off and solidifies into a new card in their hand.
Joey's sitting on the Monster Reborn card, looking completely confused. The other three gather around.
Joey looks around at his friends.
He shows them the card Bakura named as his favorite card earlier; it depicts an angel split right down the middle between light and darkness, one of its wings feathery and the other black and batlike.
As Bakura speaks, we see visions of Yugi as the Dark Magician, possessed and blank-eyed. He stabs his staff at Joey the Flame Swordsman; clobbers Tristan the Cyber Commander with it; and chases Téa the Magician of Faith.
He slaps down the "Change of Heart" card. Yugi flinches away from the light, trying somehow to resist it.
Yugi raises the arm he's shielding his face with, just a little, to look-- and drops it in shock at what he sees. A physical manifestation of the "Change of Heart" appears; it's their mild-mannered friend Bakura, dressed as the two-faced angel.
 Bakura smiles, and flits forward, speaking without moving his lips.
He flies to the Lady of Faith; the monster gasps with surprise, and falls asleep on her feet. Her head changes to become Bakura's; he is now the new Lady of Faith. Now he can speak.
A golden eye glints on the big Yugi's forehead, and the Millennium Puzzle lights up to match, streaming multicolored light. The duelist Bakura yells, unable to endure the light.
Bakura, the real one, opens his eyes. He's now full-size again, sitting where his double once sat.
Yami Bakura has replaced his other half-- in the dress of the Lady of Faith. He appears, then realizes what has happened.
He shatters in Dark Magician's reversed light,  and is conveyed to the graveyard, screaming all the way.
Then the Reaper of Cards looms up behind him. He turns, and screams...
Bakura's dad wears glasses and has dark grey hair, tied back in a ponytail. He carries a shoulder bag and is wearing a khaki suit with the sleeves rolled up, with a matching hat. Looks to be maybe an adventurer of some kind. He's walking through a narrow, dusty street lined with awnings and stalls.
The Millennium Ring certainly stands out on a table of cheap jewelry and trinkets. The merchant shows him a monster card.
Bakura's dad probably didn't notice that this innocuous merchant had glowing red eyes... End Flashback.
Meanwhile, their friends are waking up. Joey looks half-asleep, Téa's rubbing her eyes, and Tristan yawns.
Bakura leans over them, the picture of innocent goodwill.
Tristan and Joey spring together, terrified.
They're still hugging each other. Beat.
Ever self-conscious at being caught hugging, they spring apart and land on the ground. Yugi, Bakura, and Téa laugh.
Yugi laughs nervously.
Just then, they hear a scream; birds scatter from the trees nearby.
Yugi and Bakura turn, and the other three stand up.
Tableau. The five of them run toward the sound, the full moon bright above.
Bakura stands over them, the picture of innocent goodwill.
Yugi and Bakura laugh nervously. Just then, they hear a scream! Everyone turns in the direction of a part of the forest nearby where black birds are scattering from the treetops in panic.
One by one, the three Harpie sisters shatter. Mai's lifepoints fall from 800 to zero. The field is shrouded in darkness.
Mai's opponent is hidden in the dark, and we only see his eyes glint in the shadows. Then the fog begins to clear; he's huge, thick-necked, broad-shouldered, and small-eyed, in a long black coat, with a duel glove on each hand, each one carrying a big drum of star chip slots; Panik can carry maybe forty or fifty stars at a time.
Mai tries to glare back defiantly, but loses her nerve and looks aside, trying to hold herself together. Every single star chip pops out of her dueling glove, scattering all over the dueling console and the floor of the platform.
As Mai steps down from the dueling platform, Panik comes up behind her. Just then, Yugi and company run into the clearing.
They stop, about ten feet from Panik and Mai.
Panik roughly grabs Mai's right arm, wrenching her shoulder, and holds up her glove.
He lowers Mai's arm and uses it to push her toward them; she cries out and staggers a few feet across the clearing.
Joey tries to run at Panik and Bakura and Tristan restrain him.
Yugi steps forward, head bowed.
The boys stop fighting.
The Millennium Puzzle begins to glow, and shakes and sways on its own. Whether aloud or in his head, we'll never know, Yugi cries out--.
As the word is spoken, the voice speaking it grows deeper. From a grey void appears swirling lines, strange symbols, rushing wind, and a column of blue-white light, in which there appears a figure. He's like Yugi, but isn't. The more confident Yugi looks at Panik with a surety in his eyes that assures us that Panik is in for trouble.
As he speaks, he presses a button on his arena console and leg shackles slide out of panels hidden in Yugi's arena platform and fasten around his ankles. Yugi looks down, surprised, and tries to struggle. Next, two rotating gun barrels appear out of the corners of Yugi's side of the arena, and start shooting fire at his head. Yugi dodges first one, then the other, shielding his face from the fire.
Each starts with 2000 lifepoints.
Castle's improved stats are 1196/2509//) Yugi (Yami): I'm not afraid of the *dark*, Panik!.
As Panik speaks, Panik's side of the field is cloaked in darkness. Yugi is standing alone against a sea of blackness.
He places a card on the console; we can't see it.
A pair of red eyes looms toward Celtic Guardian, and Panik's monster, surrounded by a cloud of shadows, lunges out of the darkness, tackles Celtic Guardian, and, as Yugi watches with some horror, the thing in the shadows drags Celtic Guardian into the dark, until he disappears, struggling, from view. We hear Celtic Guardian get destroyed.
Panik's lifepoints drop to 494. End of song.
The projector at each corner of the field shoots a beam of light to the center, creating a blinding flash above the field. Bakura shields his eyes. Slowly the shadowy mist created by Panik's Castle of Dark Illusions evaporates...
The beams of light solidify into glowing swords, floating in the air, trapping Panik's monsters as effectively as prison bars, in full view. .
The card with this graphic is known standardly as "Yellow Luster Shield".
A shimmering barrier descends from the Castle of Dark Illusions like a translucent curtain.) .
Castle's defense points now stand at 3200, and all three other monsters' at 2600 apiece.
Yugi only chuckles.
He puts up two fingers.
Yugi flips his facedown.
He reveals a card from his hand-- Catapult Turtle.
Gaia the Dragon Champion flies out of the way and lets Catapult Turtle take the field. It's a massive metal turtle with a launching rail mounted on its back.
Gaia has settled onto the launching rail, and the catapult aims upward.
The reckless look on Yugi's face as he sets his sights on the Castle, clearly plans to test that assumption.
Gaia the Dragon Champion is pushed along the rail, picking up speed. It flies off the end of the rail, straight for the Castle. Curse of Dragon shrieks, and Gaia raises one of his twin lances and aims straight for the tower; they seem to become a meteor with their speed-- and collide head-on with the center of the Castle with an explosion.  Double-take. Triple-take. The spectators shield their eyes, groaning; the point of impact is shining like the sun.
Yugi watches silently, awaiting the outcome of his play. When the light fades, his lifepoints abruptly drop to 300.
The dust begins to clear... and a ring of turrets that was around the Castle cracks off; the rest is still there.
The Swords flicker in place, ominously hinting at what would happen.
Yugi raises a thumb, then turns it downward.
The Swords of Revealing Light vanish; and the Castle begins to fall-- straight downward.
Panik's doomed monsters claw against the Chaos Shield, as the rock spikes on the underside of the Castle slowly descend, crushing them.
As the Castle crashes to the ground, it shrouds the whole field in dust. Yugi's lifepoints remain at 300; Panik's fall straight to zero.
Panik looks over at Yugi, standing tall.
Panik raises his fist and shouts; at this point he's losing it entirely.
He brings down the fist and smashes the flamethrower control.
Both of the side flamethrowers go nuts, and in addition there's a whole line of them behind Yugi's podium, completely surrounding him. And Yugi's feet are still shackled to the podium.
Two more flamethrowers appear on the front of Panik's podium, to shoot fire straight at Yugi.
For a split second it can be seen that the fire seems to smash against an invisible wall about a foot from Yugi.
Then more flamethrowers kick in, forcing Téa and Bakura to jump back or be scorched, hiding Yugi from view. The entire arena has become a towering cyclone of fire.
Panik starts to back up, and hits the safety bar at the back of the podium.
Yugi extends a hand, and exerts some sort of power. Panik seems to shatter as though made of two-dimensional glass. He shouts once in agony...
Yugi walks past them-- Téa and Joey stand aside for him-- and approaches Mai, who has stayed back.
Joey laughs and walks over to Mai and Yugi.
Joey grabs the star chips out of Yugi's hand.
He grins and laughs in Mai's face. *That* gets her.
Yugi is standing in the middle while Mai yells at Joey, looking completely confused.
Mai reaches for them and Joey, slightly taller than she is, tauntingly holds them out of reach, laughing.
Joey slaps the star chips into the hand she raised to grab them away from him, in a sort of high-five.
Mai looks at the star chips in her hand, completely mystified.
Mai regards them; she's thinking it over...
Then Joey gets goofy again and the serious mood is broken.
Tristan smiles and turns to leave.
Tristan, Bakura, Téa, and Yugi laugh.
Yugi and Téa are the last in the group. When Mai calls out, both of them turn.
Yugi answers solemnly, but when he turns away and keeps walking, he smiles proudly.
Tableau. Yugi and his friends leave the side of Arena 11; Mai watches them go, almost eager with hope.
Clouds drift past in the still night air above Castle Pegasus on the island of Duelist Kingdom. A pale yellow full moon shines above.
A strand of Pegasus' hair falls aside, and the Millennium Eye comes into view. Pegasus is calm, cunning, sinister.
Pegasus sips from his glass.
The Millennium Eye glints with an inner fire, ominously hinting what those plans might be. At least one of the Big Five smiles an evil smile; they'll let Pegasus deal with Kaiba because he clearly has something nasty planned.
Pegasus stands, raising his glass to the screen.
His video conference over, Pegasus walks to the window with his glass, looking up at the yellow-green moon above.
To his left, the metal briefcase he took with him when he escaped earlier occupies the passenger seat.
Kaiba's three Blue-Eyes White Dragons quail before the might of the Forbidden One himself; he prepares to attack.
End Flashback.
End vision.
Ahead the island is getting closer and closer, a shadowy landmass on the horizon.
Bakura holds the Millennium ring in his hand; its rightmost point is glowing and pointing straight outward, ignoring gravity.
The teacher, standing at a desk/lectern in front, speaks.
Later on, during some recess, Joey slaps down Battle Warrior beside his Axe Raider, up against Yugi's Celtic Guardian and Beaver Warrior.
Bakura, standing alone, notices this quiet duel happening in the corner over a desk; Tristan and Téa are spectators, watching over Yugi's shoulders.
Bakura is holding the Millennium Ring in his hand, and the farthest left point, the one nearest the duel, is pointing straight toward it.
During that duel, as always, Yugi was wearing the Millennium Puzzle on a cord around his neck. It glimmered in the light, as though it knew it was being detected. End Flashback.
Yugi nods.
Vision changes, as Yugi recalls the moment he completed the Millennium Puzzle and it blazed with light.
He thinks of the other personality that takes over when he duels, a confident, powerful figure; in the vision he casts two different shadows. End vision. As Yugi thinks, the faces of the people he thinks about drift across the moon above.
Suddenly, the sound of helicopter blades. Yugi sits up.
The helicopter's harsh single headlight shines right down on top of them, and the helicopter blades create a strong wind. Tristan wakes up and pushes himself up on his hands, then Joey wakes and sits up, shielding his eyes.
Téa pokes her head out of the tent, the sleeping bag around her shoulders for warmth.
The helicopter descends, and touches down on the ground about ten feet from where they are all now standing. They wait as the helicopter blades whir to a halt. The pilot jumps out.
Kaiba is carrying his metal briefcase in one hand, the other hooked into his pocket, and the expression on his face is sour and contemptuous. Yugi hurries forward; him, at least, Kaiba greets politely.
Kaiba accepts his deck and glances at it.
With that cool brush-off, Kaiba turns and starts to walk away toward the forest.
Kaiba turns away again and keeps walking.
Joey runs over to Kaiba, grabs his lapels and gets in front of him. Kaiba regards Joey as he would an insect.
He removes Joey's right hand from his left lapel with a wrist-twisting grab. Joey struggles. Still gripping Joey's hand, Kaiba pulls it past himself, pulling Joey with it. Joey, who wasn't expecting it, trips over Kaiba's legs, goes flying, and lands on his face in the dirt. Kaiba barely moved more than his arm to do that.
Yugi runs over to kneel next to Joey.
Yugi kneels over Joey, whom Kaiba has just thrown to the ground.
He pushes himself up on his hands and knees, still a bit winded.
Joey stands.
Kaiba turns around and starts walking away.
Kaiba halts and turns back; *that* got his attention.
Tristan, Téa, and Bakura walk over to Joey.
Kaiba sets the briefcase on the ground and opens it.
The bottom half of the briefcase is stacked with cards. TYG016_id1. In the padded top half are nested two objects, each one shaped like a flipped-over dinner plate. Each disk has a central rectangular panel and four more around the center one, each slanting from a side of the center one. The outer edges of the disks are red, with white in the center. Kaiba picks up one and throws it to Joey, who catches it like a frisbee.
Joey fits the wristband on the bottom of the small top piece around his left forearm, testing the fit, while Bakura holds the larger disk. Once it's fitted, Joey anticlimactically turns back to Kaiba.
Kaiba, who already has the other device on, demonstrates; there's a slot on the wrist portion for his deck, and the lifepoint screen is on top of it. As Kaiba slots the deck, the screen lights up and reads 2000.
Kaiba places Battle Ox on the card reader in the center of his disk.
Kaiba throws the disk portion as hard as he can toward the center of the field. It plays out a line between the disk and the wrist counter. The disk hovers a few inches off the ground, and a blast of multicolored light explodes upward from it, then becomes a thousand streams of sparkling light.
Then Kaiba's vicious, armored ox appears.
Joey looks up at the very real-looking monster.
Joey puts a card on the center of the disk.
Joey flings his disk just like Kaiba did, and his monster appears above it.
Kaiba is undaunted.
The monsters fight, and Battle Ox brings its axe down on Armored Lizard's neck-- but Armored Lizard is still there.
Armored Lizard doesn't withstand it for long before being beheaded and evaporating. Joey's Armored Lizard card flies off the disk.
Joey retracts the disk and catches it in his hand.
He does each step as he speaks it.
Flame Swordsman's crystalline orange sword shatters against Battle Ox's axe, and Flame Swordsman, too, evaporates.
Rabid Horseman destroys Joey's Swamp Battleguard, dropping his lifepoints to 1400.
Rabid Horseman takes out Joey's next monster just as easily, leaving him with 1100 lifepoints.
900 lifepoints.
700 lifepoints. The spectators watch silently as Joey's monsters fall one by one, as fast as he can play them.
This card is standardly known as Rock Ogre Grotto #1.
And now Joey's down to 500 lifepoints, winded and breathing heavily, sweat breaking out on his face. In despair, he falls to his knees before Kaiba and his Rabid Horseman.
Joey stands up again, never once looking away from glaring at Kaiba.
Kaiba's Rabid Horseman is looking decidedly less huge; but Kaiba's confidence doesn't waver.
Red-Eyes destroys Rabid Horseman in a blaze of red and white fire. Kaiba's down to 1600 lifepoints.
Yugi gasps; he already knows what card Kaiba is holding in his hand. Kaiba places it on the disk, and throws as he speaks its name.
Joey's dragon lifts its head against the blaze of pure white, then is simply gone, vaporized. Joey's dueling disk retracts and he catches it, as his lifepoints fall to zero. He drops to one knee, shaking with frustration.
High above the forests of Duelist Kingdom, the moon shines bright yellowish-green, among scattered clouds and stars.
Down on the ground we return to the duel.
Yugi hurries forward to Joey's side, followed momentarily by the others.
Kaiba turns his head to his right and upward, toward the castle looming above them through the trees.
Vision. Pegasus calmly and menacingly sits facing us on a simple wooden chair, against a warm background of blurry candles. As Kaiba speaks, Pegasus and the chair recede into the distance, and duel cards, all facedown, scroll across the screen, an impregnable wall between Pegasus and any attempt to challenge him. As Kaiba speaks, his voice carries a growing tinge of desperation.
End vision. Kaiba continues to speak, eyes fixed grimly on the castle above.
Kaiba looks back at the castle.
Several individual chairs are set up around the edge of the arena floor itself. Kaiba, wearing his all-blue suit-- same as when he first dueled Yugi-- is seated in one of these chairs; arms and legs crossed, looking characteristically sour. He's not impressed and what a waste of his time. Around the edge of the arena floor, we can see other, far cheerier VIP spectators standing or sitting; one is crouched over as though taking a picture. Kaiba stiffly watches the table in the center; to his right sits Pegasus, easily identifiable in his signature fancy red suit.
To Kaiba's left, Pegasus' opponent, Bandit Keith, is a brash bully in his twenties or thirties. He wears his thick blond hair under a stars-and-stripes bandanna; red shirt, metal wristbands, cream-colored pants, leather boots. He folds his arms as he matches wills with Pegasus, keeping a poker face.
Behind Kaiba, a kid in the front seats of the crowd says eagerly--.
Keith pulls his next card and looks at it, angular blue eyes intense. He still doesn't notice that the expression on Pegasus' face is nowhere near afraid.
Pegasus doesn't reply, still with that calculating smile.) .
From the sidelines, Kaiba, watching closely, is quietly intent on this.) Kaiba (VO): Pegasus just stared straight into Keith's eyes, with unnerving confidence. Then he scribbled something on a piece of paper and called over some kid from the crowd. .
We look back at Pegasus as he beckons to the kid who spoke up a few moments before. The kid questioningly points to himself, unable to believe what's happening.
Bandit Keith is shaking with rage and surprise.
The little kid is now looking rather small in Pegasus' chair, and Pegasus is standing at his shoulder.
The kid taking over Pegasus' seat looks up at him wide-eyed; one of his front teeth is missing.
Pegasus hands the kid a folded slip of paper. A few moments later, Bandit Keith is impatiently watching the bewildered kid read the note.
Pegasus, meanwhile, wanders over to the empty seat next to Kaiba and sits down.
Meanwhile, Bandit Keith is glaring over toward Pegasus out of the corner of his eye.
Pronounced with a hard "ch", as found in Italian.
Keith stands from his chair, furious.
Keith grabs the note from the kid's hand and reads it. His fury changes to utter shock and confusion.
Behind Pegasus' hair, the Millennium Eye glints as Pegasus watches smugly. He stands.
Pegasus raises the hand of the little boy who took his place at the table, proclaiming his victory to the stadium, while Keith is on his knees in the background, furious and completely bewildered.
Meanwhile, Kaiba has just watched this whole occurrence and is no longer bored. His mouth hangs open in shock.
End Flashback.
Behind Pegasus' hair, a golden shimmer can be seen.
Indeed, that's his card. Pegasus predicted it without seeing it!.
End Flashback.
Kaiba turns to leave.
Kaiba stops walking.
Kaiba looks back over his shoulder with a cold smile.
Kaiba turns and walks away into the dark forests of Duelist Kingdom, alone. Castle Pegasus looms above on the cliffside.
Kaiba points a condemning finger at him.
Suddenly Joey finds himself wearing a full-body dog suit. And he is sitting obediently near Kaiba's shoe, humiliated.
Joey looks down, trying not to cry, and his whimpers even sound like those of a dog, fading into real sobs...
It was all a dream. The other three guys are still asleep around him, all four in the shade of a huge tree. Bakura leans against the side, Tristan snoozes on a soft patch of ground, using his coat as a blanket, and Yugi is using his backpack as a pillow. It's a bright, beautiful morning at Duelist Kingdom.
Then he gets angry.
They do.
Téa joins them from a nearby clearing.
Téa is carrying Mai's knapsack.
Yugi gasps, and takes it. Joey and Tristan read over his shoulder. From the appearance of the text, it's quite likely that Mai's only available writing implement was lipstick. It's sealed with a kiss at the bottom, and as Yugi reads it, he can almost see Mai throwing him a wink and thumbs-up.
Yugi blushes a little.
Yugi's blush disappears, as he thinks, then replies.
They look out at the ocean, blue and benign, and the few trees between them and the water over the horizon. Birds are wheeling through the bright, fluffy white clouds in the beautiful blue sky.
Yugi smiles with determination; he's ready for another day of the tournament.
Joey stops walking.
Joey turns, jabbing at Tristan, growling nose to nose; clearly he's a bit on-edge.
Téa shoves them apart.
All three laugh. The kid who spoke has a gaunt, skeletal face and wild black hair. He speaks again.
The guy next to him is huge and muscly, with spiky black hair; he's watching with a pair of binoculars to his face.
The third has a mop of bright red hair and little tiny glasses; he speaks with a cockney sort of accent.
As we watch, we catch a snatch of dialogue.
Yugi chuckles.
The three of them sneak away, into the thick forest.
Bonz and Zigor share a look.
Bandit Keith cracks his knuckles as he speaks. He's sitting on a rock, with his three goons reporting to him.
The goons keep talking, as Bandit Keith shoots a glare over his shoulder at the distant castle.
Bandit Keith is sitting across the table from Pegasus. He pulls a card.
Pegasus' inscrutable smile widens very slightly, his single eye shrewd. He writes on a small notecard, then beckons to the stands.
The little kid who just took over Pegasus' chair looks a bit like a deer in the headlights.
He hands the kid his notecard. A moment or two later, Keith watches the kid read the notecard, and glares over toward where Pegasus is now sitting.
He snatches the notecard.
Then Keith read the card. Pegasus already knew what he would find; the Millennium Eye glints through his hair.
Pegasus raises the kid's hand as he declares the winner of the duel, while Bandit Keith huddles on the floor, completely devastated.
End Flashback.
He turns back to Bonz, Syd, and Zigor.
All three thugs chuckle thuggishly.
Yugi, Joey, Tristan, Téa, and Bakura continue on through the forest; it may be just Joey, but it does seem a bit quieter than usual.
Joey stops walking.
Joey runs off down the road.
Syd and Zigor are watching the group from a dense clump of bushes; they snicker.
Bandit Keith is leading the way with a flashlight, and Bonz is cowering behind him as they walk.
A colony of bats awakens as they pass, flying in all directions, screeching.
Bandit Keith waits, callously amused, as Bonz catches his breath, having stumbled to the ground in terror of the bats.
Elsewhere in the cave there are more bats, and a stalactite drips somewhere in the darkness. Bandit Keith sifts through Bonz's dueling deck, while Bonz holds the flashlight.
Bandit Keith pulls open the sides of his vest. Inside are six pockets, each one stuffed with a big stack of cards.
Bonz looks around nervously.
Keith hands Bonz his deck back. Bonz's face is spookily uplit by the flashlight.
Bandit Keith takes the flashlight and shoves Bonz, who stumbles and falls on his face on the ground-- face to face with a pile of human skulls!! Bonz picks one up in both hands, face-to-face, even as he screams in terror. He throws it up in the air, and Keith casually catches it.
Keith tosses the skull away and keeps walking. Bonz is left in darkness, with Keith carrying the flashlight.
He notices that someone has come up behind him.
He turns; he doesn't recognize Zigor, but that knuckle-cracking is not a good sign.
He opens his eyes; Zigor is snickering right in front of him. Joey wakes up all the way, and freaks out.
The platform under Joey starts to move; he finally starts to realize where he is as he stands up; he's on the blue-side dueling platform, of a holographic arena inside a dark cave. The arena's fairly small and cozy; Joey's standing maybe three feet off the ground and ten feet across the field. This is arena 13, from the number n the side, and it's got a graveyard theme going. The sides of the arena are painted to look like old, cracked wood; a couple of lit candles flicker around the edges of the cave. Bandit Keith is sitting on a rock beyond the end of the other side of the field, with Syd standing next to him.
Joey looks around more. The edges of the cave are littered with human skulls and bones, including one acting as a platform for a candle. The field is covered with gravestones, and the opponent's platform looks just like the biggest one of all.
Then a head begins to rise from behind the tombstone.
His yell echoes down the empty tunnel.
Out on the forest path somewhere...
The two pairs run off in different directions.
It really does; Joey is staring into space with a very silly look on his face.
Zigor picks up a skull and lobs it at Joey's head.
The skull bonks Joey on the head.
Bonz wilts. Bandit Keith, Syd, and Zigor are laughing out loud too.
Joey looks around shiftily, not liking the idea of being cornered.
Keith, Syd, and Zigor all guffaw.
Blue-Eyes roars, larger than life. End Flashback.
He throws them down on the console.
Each duelist starts with 2000 lifepoints.
They stop and look around, catching their breath.
Yugi has found the waterfall from earlier.
Bonz reaches for The Snake Hair.
He looks at his hand.
Keith growls. Bonz hesitates.
Joey keeps raving in the background.
Axe Raider slashes Zanki, and it disintegrates with a moan.
Bonz's lifepoints decrease to 1800.
Bonz resentfully looks over his shoulder at Bandit Keith, who chuckles nonchalantly.
He reaches for a card in his hand. Again, Keith intervenes.
Bonz sets a monster facedown in defense mode.
Axe Raider destroys Bonz's facedown Crawling Dragon.
Bonz looks up at Bandit Keith, both scared and frustrated.
Bonz reluctantly plays the monster Keith indicated.
Flame Swordsman squares off with Crass Clown, and they attack.
Flame Swordsman's sword is a whirlwind of fire. Crass Clown goes up in smoke.
Bonz's lifepoints fall to 1350.
He closes his eyes and thinks of Serenity's smiling face.
Bonz draws his next card.
It's a trap card that depicts a spooky graveyard with a plume of purple mist.
On the field below, a claw begins to emerge from the earth. Joey looks scared.
Two more zombies start digging their way out of the ground. One of them laughs like Crass Clown did.
Téa kicks a stone, then spots, beside it, a small tan wallet.
She opens the wallet as Tristan looks over her shoulder.
It's pretty empty and plain, except for the picture inside.
Yugi and Bakura join them from other directions.
They jog toward the cave.
Leaning against the wall ahead of them are two coffins.
Bakura walks up to one of them and carefully lays a hand on the lid.
A metal chain starts clanking nearby. The coffin Téa's standing near starts to lean forward, until it's standing vertically.
Then the door falls open, and the skeleton inside collapses forward. Tristan and Yugi watch, chagrined, as pandemonium ensues; Téa and Bakura frantically dash around in circles screaming, trying to rid themselves of the two skeletons that fell out of the two caskets. Then Tristan gets into the fray, punching Bakura's skeleton off of him. Yugi jumps in and pulls Téa's off of her. The skeletons fall to the cavern floor, broken and very dead. Téa and Bakura are still kind of shaken.
That means zombie Zanki's attack points are 1950, zombie Crawling Dragon's attack points are 2080, and zombie Clown's attack points are 1755. All of their defense points remain at zero.
Axe Raider slashes-- but the gash he makes heals instantly.
Dragon Zombie breathes a nasty brown mist, and Axe Raider's axe dissolves as it hits the ground.
He looks over at his last monster-- Flame Swordsman.
The musty skulls stare ominously from the shadows of the cavern, the candles perched on their heads casting eerie light. Bonz's three monstrous zombies square off against Joey. The zombie Zanki has 1950 attack points, the reanimated Crawling Dragon has 2080, and the undead Crass Clown has 1755; all three have 0 defense points. Joey's lone Flame Swordsman faces them down with a mere 1800 attack and 1600 defense points.
Bonz's lifepoints stand at 1350.
Joey's lifepoints are currently 1620.
Joey hesitates over his hand, then does so.
Garoozis slashes in five lines that slice out a star. Clown Zombie is cut to pieces.
The pieces of clown drift back together, and become a whole Clown Zombie again; it giggles creepily.
Bonz patiently explains, as we watch the attack point reading next to his Clown Zombie.
The zombie balances on a ball, flinging four glowing daggers to sink into Garoozis' armored chest. It roars, and is destroyed. Joey sighs; now he has 1530 lifepoints left.
Bakura appears out of the darkness down the tunnel behind them, a skeleton on his back.
The other three freak out and start running the other way from Bakura and his passenger. Bakura runs after them.
Yugi sits up.
They look where Tristan's looking. Ahead of them is a fork in the passage, the intersection lit with a spine of candles where the tunnel splits. Upon closer inspection, the candleholders are skulls with their jaws opened wide to hold the candles.
Bakura's sheepish laugh says he agrees. Tristan is indignant.
As Bakura stands, his foot compresses a panel hidden in the stone floor.
They all hear an ominous rumbling, and look down one of the tunnels.
Bakura has both hands clasped over his mouth, mortified; what has he done?!.
As they stare down the tunnel, a giant boulder comes rolling into view, as wide as the tunnel itself-- rolling right toward them! Everyone reacts with panic, and they run, shouting, wailing, down the left-hand tunnel, with the boulder rolling after them.
They're running down the tunnel as fast as they can, chased by a giant boulder. Then Bakura trips. Téa looks back, and sees him fall, as though in slow motion, then so do Tristan and Yugi, as Bakura falls through the air to land on the tunnel floor-- right in the boulder's path. It rolls right over him as soon as he hits the ground.
He looks ahead. They're headed straight for a wall.
Tristan skids to a stop, turning.
He waits as the boulder rolls toward him, fist clocked back to punch.
Tristan punches, and the whole boulder swells-- then pops. Shreds of rubber drift through the air. Téa and Yugi stand there stupefied. Tristan looks every bit as shocked.
There's a small, round device on the ground, covered with speakers.
They go back and find Bakura lying on the tunnel floor twitching, completely shell-shocked. Téa crouches down to speak to him.
Joey clenches his teeth, looking down at his four wagered star chips on the console.) Joey (think): If I lose these chips, I get axed from the tournament!.
He envisions himself in a dog costume, wimpering miserably. End vision.
He draws-- it's Time Wizard.
End Flashback.
Bonz gasps; even Keith looks surprised.
The spinner on Time Wizard's staff begins to spin. Bonz turns to Keith, panicked.
Bonz does not look reassured.
The spinner keeps spinning.
Bonz rubs his hands together as he, too, prays for a favorable outcome.
The spinner slows.
The spinner clicks to Skull; Syd and Zigor grunt. Crest. Bonz rubs his hands together even harder while Keith waits disinterestedly. Skull. Joey grits his teeth. Crest... then it finally stops completely on Skull, with a broken sort of mechanical groan.
Bonz is elated-- he's saved!.
A portal with blue sky and white clouds appears in the air above Joey's field.
Flame Swordsman groans one last time, and both he and Time Wizard evaporate into the sky portal.
That leaves him with a scant 630, and a very sad face. Bonz still has 1305 lifepoints.
He sets a monster in facedown defense position.
Bonz's new monster is a gigantic pumpkin, swelling up to loom over the field.
Pumpking extends a vine to each of the zombies, rooting its tendrils into their flesh.) .
As Bonz speaks, zombie fuel pulses through the rooted vines, pumping power from Pumpking into the zombies. They begin to grow larger.
Clown Zombie's points swell to 2025, Dragon Zombie's grow to 2240, and Armored Zombie's increase to 2100.
Dragon Zombie destroys Joey's set Kojikocy.
Dragon Zombie's points grow again to 2400, Clown Zombie's to 2160, and Armored Zombie's to 2250.
Joey's second set monster fares no better.
Joey sets another defensive monster.
Joey's next monster falls just as easily as the first two.
Another of Joey's monsters bites the dust.
Clown Zombie's points are now at 2430, and Armored Zombie's points are 2550. Dragon Zombie's are a whopping 2720. Pumpking's points are 1950.
Yugi, Tristan, Téa, and Bakura have finally found the duel. Joey's a bit stunned.
Syd and Zigor nod with a grunt.
Then Zigor and Syd step between Joey and the rest of the gang.
Tristan runs at them. Syd barely moves; his eyes never leave Tristan; he flicks a marble from his hand, and it strikes the center of Tristan's forehead perfectly. While Tristan's reeling from that, Zigor lunges forward and punches Tristan in the stomach, hard. Tristan falls to the floor, moaning.
Joey moves to climb down from the podium.
Joey and Zigor look over their shoulders; Tristan is rising slowly to his feet, one hand to his gut.
Tristan throws Joey the wallet they found abandoned by the waterfall, with a picture of Serenity inside.
Joey looks down; he's placed Serenity's picture on the dueling console.
Joey sets another defensive monster.
Bonz just drew the spell card "Stop Defense".
Clown Zombie's attack points rise to 2565, Armored Zombie's to 2700, and Dragon Zombie's to 2880.
Joey's Tiger Axe falls.
Joey sighs, looking down at Serenity's portrait.
Everyone looks at him.
Black lightning crackles around a monster space in the center of Joey's side of the field, and green light burst forth from it, straight upward. Joey's dragon takes the field with its avian cry, glossy-scaled and deadly.
Red-Eyes incinerates Pumpking.
Red-Eyes is blasted off the field; Joey shields his face from the flying dust.
Joey's lifepoints fall further to 150.
The dust is still clearing from the field.
Tristan is still standing just behind Zigor.
Yugi stares up at him, resolute. Joey stares back for a moment, halfway confused; but the look on Yugi's face gives him all the confidence he needs.
He looks at the card he drew.
The holograms seem to short out for a moment; the arena shakes.
The zombies seem to wilt, almost as though melting. A bead of sweat drips down Keith's face.
Now Clown Zombie's stats read 0 attack points and 2565 defense points, Dragon Zombie's read 0 attack points and 2880 defense, and Armored Zombie's stats are 0 attack points and 2700 defense points.
Battle Warrior's attack points become 1000 and his defense is now 700.
Battle Warrior punches Dragon Zombie and it crumbles to pieces.
Bonz's lifepoints decrease to zero. He's turning blue with shame.
Joey turns and answers with a thumbs-up.
Bandit Keith hops off the rock ledge from where he watched the duel and starts to walk out.
Keith ignores all three-- but when Joey calls out to him he stops.
Keith walks away down the dark tunnel without looking back. By now, even Bonz has scrambled to follow him, and his three goons follow. Joey's friends watch them leave.
Joey scratches his nose, embarrassed at the praise.
Joey laughs sheepishly, and looks down at his dueling gauntlet; only two spaces out of ten don't contain star chips.
The other four mutter enthusiastic assent.
The five of them walk back up the tunnel, Joey in the lead. At the end of the tunnel, they see--.
They start running, eager to escape the catacombs. As they run, something begins to eclipse the light, with a rumbling sound. They stop short.
Once the cave entrance is sealed, the three thugs bend over, catching their breath.
Bonz opens his eyes as he and Syd watch Zigor hit the ground facefirst.
Bandit Keith steps over him.
Bonz and Syd are trembling.
We only hear the battle-- short and one-sided.
Bandit Keith fits the last star chip into his glove.
Bandit Keith strolls away into the forest toward the castle, leaving his three henchmen incapacitated on the ground. Bonz's eyes are rolling opposite directions.
All five keep groaning, straining; the rock doesn't move...
They stop trying to push it; the boulder isn't going anywhere.
Bakura isn't listening; the Millennium Ring has caught his attention. He turns and walks back down the tunnel, letting it lead him.
Bakura doesn't pause.
Bakura reaches a fork in the tunnel and pauses, calling back to them.
He leads them down the tunnel, one point of the Ring directing them straight ahead; the others reluctantly follow.
As Bakura speaks, Pegasus is listening to every word, the Eye in question glinting behind its concealing locks of hair. The sound quality suggests that our heroes are being picked up by some hidden microphones. The screen above the banquet table shows a series of images. First, a duel arena; next, the face of the mysterious presence who represents Yugi when he duels.
Pegasus sips from his wineglass with a chuckle as Joey says contemptuously--.
The tunnel scene swaps into the middle inset, and the third image, of a prisoner in a dungeon, now takes up most of the screen. Pegasus lowers his wineglass with a satisfied smile.
The cell is dark and isolated; Mokuba sits alone and silent, motionless, chained to the cold stone wall he's slumped against, behind thick iron bars. Heavy manacles grasp his ankles just above his sneakers, scrunching up his jeans.
Mokuba stares blankly at the floor, weary and despairing, almost sobbing as he speaks.
Seto grips the strap of the bag with one hand and Mokie's hand with the other, standing strong for the sake of his little brother, stoic resolve hiding fear; he's eleven or twelve years old. Mokie clings to his hand, trying to be as brave; he looks like he might be six or seven.
End Flashback.
Mokuba stares bleakly at the dark floor. He pulls a pendant from under his shirt that hangs around his neck by a cord, and pops open the card-shaped locket.
Seto pauses in the middle of moving a pawn to smile for someone taking a picture of the two of them. End Flashback.
The very same picture, the part with Seto and his wistful sort of smile, is in the locket Mokuba is looking at.
Bakura pauses at an intersection, intent on the Millennium Ring.
He runs around the nearest right-hand corner, and they follow.
Bakura leads them past two more side-passages, then turns right again when the Ring glints. The others almost run past the turn before changing course. Up ahead, Bakura is standing at the threshold of a light-filled doorway-- the end of the maze.
The others catch up, and as their eyes adjust to the bright light they can see the room ahead.
They have come to a large, brightly-lit room, with a duel arena standing at its center. The walls are stone, with columns and panels in polished, lacquered wood.
Across the room, two doors are also marked with the symbols-- the blue to their left, the green to their right. Joey nervously answers.
All of them look left, stunned; the people speaking to them backflip into view, one in orange robes, the other in green, and otherwise completely identical.
Nonplussed, they watch the two acrobats fly back and forth across their line of sight, kicking, leaping, even sparring, with orange blocking a rain of midair kicks from green, then both spring high into the air, spinning side-by-side in somersaults.
At this point the entire group is completely gobsmacked. The acrobats land on the floor before them.
The orange one has the blue symbol from the room tattooed in black on his forehead; the one in green has the green symbol, also tattooed in black.
They now stand foot to foot and shoulder to shoulder, arms crossed.
They step, kick straight up, and land in deeper stances; a fearsome challenge.
The bright light from the ceiling glares off their bald heads.
Both Paradox Brothers also wear dueling gloves full of star chips. Yugi gasps.
As the Brothers speak, each names the door behind him, which matches the symbol on his forehead.
As each speaks, their gestures mirror each other.
With that, they point the way to the arena ahead.
A bright purple eye opens-- it's like Yugi's, but isn't. The Millennium Puzzle begins to glow, and shakes and sways on its own. Whether aloud or in his head, we'll never know, Yugi cries out--.
As the word is spoken, the voice speaking it grows deeper. From a grey void appears swirling lines, strange symbols, rushing wind, and a column of blue-white light, in which there appears a figure. He's like Yugi, but isn't. The other Yugi steps forward, with an assured smile.
First Para's eyes narrow in amusement, then Dox's.
Joey removes two stars from his dueling glove and places them on the console.
Yugi holds up his wagered stars between his spread fingers.
Téa, Tristan, and Bakura have a good view of the match from the doorway they came from, a raised platform halfway between Yugi and Joey.
Dox draws his opening hand and draw phase card in a flurry of martial arts.
The entire field begins to glow.
Kaiba halts, and lifts a pendant that hangs around his neck, a card-shaped locket just like Mokuba's. He stares at it, then pops it open; it contains an image of Mokie from the same photograph, smiling ingenuously over his shoulder while he plays chess with his big brother.
End Flashback.
Joey looks over at Yugi, who doesn't notice.
As Para explains, the visual aid is an aerial map of the maze. It is nine squares by nine squares; in this transcript I'll use a grid system to record moves in sufficient detail, with the columns from the blue side's left to right lettered A-I, and the rows from the red side to the blue side numbered 1-9; therefore, Para's corner is A1, Dox's I1, Joey's A9, and Yugi's I9. We later find that rows 1 and 9 are more like margins, in which either team's monsters can appear in no particular column and move from there onto the gameboard squares.
Para's sample monster, Penguin Knight, appears on square I5.
Penguin Knight struts forward its couple spaces, then looks up with a panicked cheep; it's just run into a big scary monster in the maze, TYG019_id1!.
The brothers grin callously in perfect unison.
He sips from his wineglass.) .
The spectator section watches anxiously; Joey looks worried, and Yugi frowns.
Yugi frowns deeper; the truths-and-lies game has already begun. Both of the brothers are smiling widely, revealing nothing about which of them is speaking falsely.
Standing at the crossroads is a caricatured villager in Para's orange robes, with a hoe slung over his shoulder. The kid opposite him looks just like a caricature of Joey, with a coral-red bandanna and satchel.
Joey's face is solemn as he recounts the riddle.
Joey's eye opens wider as he explains the punchline.
The villager turns and heads down the right-hand path, then backs up as Joey explains the alternate scenario.) Joey (VO): And a *liar* would have to take 'im to the village a' truth *too*, 'cause that'd be *lyin'*!.
The 'liar' villager hesitates toward the left-hand path then also takes the right fork. End Vision.
Joey points, from Para across to Dox.
Yugi looks over at Joey, who doesn't see; Yugi is observing the situation but uncertain.
Para raises a hand, as does Dox, and both point-- to the door at the base of Dox's podium.
Yugi frowns; the spectators gasp.
Both brothers are smiling fiendishly. Yugi is still frowning pensively.
The one orange-robed villager splits into two, one in orange, the other in green, standing in front of opposite paths. The Joey-like kid in the riddle doesn't look too happy about that.
End Vision.
The brothers are no longer grinning; Yugi's found them out!.
End Vision.
End Vision.
The spectators watch anxiously as the two sides face off again; the duel is back on.
Yugi draws.
Yugi's monster appears in the row 9 margin.
Beaver Warrior walks forward from E9 to E6.
Yugi gasps; a shadowy shape flits over the surface of the maze walls.) Yugi (Yami): What the...?!.
The shadow on the wall zooms toward Beaver Warrior, and Shadow Ghoul emerges halfway out of the wall to attack. Beaver Warrior turns around, overwhelmed by the unexpected threat.
Wall Shadow slices Beaver Warrior with its claws and destroys it. Yugi gasps; Joey groans.
Beaver Warrior's little snarl can still be heard in the air near Wall Shadow's claws.
Yugi's lifepoints fall to 1600.
As Yugi thinks this, the Wall Shadow's claws seem to loom over him as well...
Axe Raider warily eyes the maze from his starting location in the row 9 margin.
Labyrinth Tank has tiny drills sticking off of its drills; a fearsome, impossible piece of machinery. It rolls forward into the maze.
Yugi draws, then clandestinely looks over toward Joey; Joey matches the look.
The Wall Shadow races along the wall toward Yugi's monster.
Celtic Guardian watches it come, unflinching. Shadow Ghoul erupts from the wall over his head, ready to claw him. Yugi smiles with satisfaction; the trap has just been sprung.
Kunai With Chain is a sharp, hooking blade on the end of a thick metal chain, that wraps itself around Wall Shadow and stops it from moving.
Joey's Axe Raider holds the other end of the chain, wielding it as a weapon.
Celtic Guardian, with its new attack total of 1900, slices Wall Shadow and destroys it.
They share a smile; Joey adds a gleeful thumbs-up.
Both brothers are growling through their teeth.
Pan out through the screen over Pegasus' banquet table; he is, of course, watching the duel. He raises his wineglass to the screen.
A knock at the door erases Pegasus' smile; what now?.
Croquet enters from the door at the other end of the long table.
Pegasus sets down his goblet.
Pegasus' one copper-brown eye narrows; the golden Millennium Eye glints between strands of his hair.
Mokuba slouches against the hard rock of his dark dungeon cell, knees to his chest, ankles chained. He plaintively gazes at the locket open in his hand, face scratched and dirty, eyes dark with grief.
Mokie falls to his knees, crying. Seto runs past, and Mokie can barely look up from crying before Seto has tackled the one holding the toy to the ground; the rest of them aren't laughing anymore.
Seto hands Mokie the toy.
Beyond the treetops, the Castle Pegasus looms ahead... To Be Continued...
He picks up the card-shaped locket around his neck, pops it open. It contains a picture of a younger Mokuba, smiling over his shoulder at the camera.
Mokie watches wide-eyed as Seto makes a move. Seto doesn't quite smile, but he relaxes, enjoying the moment. Mokie smiles up at him wholeheartedly.
End Flashback.
Kaiba startles slightly. Kemo's diction fudges the hard T in Kaiba's name.
Kemo appears from behind a tree, sunglasses glinting.
He punches at Kaiba, who ducks under his guard and slams an elbow into his ribs; Kemo slumps, groaning. Kaiba grabs the front of his suit and throws him. Kemo starts to get up, but not quickly.
Kaiba grabs the back of his collar and lifts him up, pinning at least one arm.
The castle's visible through the tree cover above them.
Dox has 2000 lifepoints, Para 1700, Yugi 1600, and Joey 2000.) Joey: Hmmmph...
The spectators-- Tristan, Téa, and Bakura-- watch tensely.
Joey pulls a card, and looks at it, then at his hand.
Axe Raider stands several paces behind Celtic Guardian, watching his back.
Flame Swordsman appears next to Axe Raider.
Flame Swordsman paces forward to join Celtic Guardian at E7.
Axe Raider's attack points increase from 1700 to 2200.
The Labyrinth Tank races through the maze passages with its seven levels.
Dark Magician executes a leaping flip, and lands on his feet in the space in front of their other monsters, E6.
Yugi doesn't smile; he doubts the security of their position more than Joey does.
Para draws, then smiles.
They go into another acrobatic routine; backfilps--.
Both leap high in the air, flipping over and over--.
--And land solidly on the floor.
The field begins to shake.
All around Yugi and Joey's monsters, the walls of the maze are popping up and down, the maze changing shape.
The maze walls slide up and down, changing the shape of the labyrinth.
Just then, a wall pops up between Yugi's monsters on E6 and Joey's on E7; they've been separated! The spectators gasp.
Joey draws.
He looks over at Yugi, who replies with that dauntless smile.
Joey directs his monsters' movement on a touch screen that's a square grid; they begin in square E7, then move F7, F6, F5, F4.
The tile Axe Raider is about to step onto has a design on it that looks like a spider.
A man-size, brown spider appears out of the ground under Axe Raider's feet and grabs Joey's monster in its claws.
The spider squeezes Axe Raider tighter, and the warrior turns to dust.
That leaves Joey with 1600; he looks devastated. Yugi doesn't turn a hair. The brothers wear identical satisfied smirks.
The maze floor is rumbling. Flame Swordsman is now all alone facing Jirai Gumo, when Labyrinth Tank roars around the corner right behind the spider.
Yugi looks wary.
Beneath Dox's facedown lurks a gigantic annelid with rows of teeth.
As Yugi narrates, Dark Magician is sealed, arms folded across his chest, in a tall, narrow box that closes with three separate cupboard doors in front, a question mark on each. Dozens of swords appear and stab through the slits in the side of the box, skewering every part of its contents.
The first box, still skewered with swords, slowly opens, door by door...
Inside is Jirai Gumo's card, pierced by the swords.) Dox: My spider is skewered!.
The second box, not full of swords, opens; it contains Yugi's Dark Magician.
Yugi's Dark Magician now stands between Joey's Flame Swordsman and the Labyrinth Tank.
Dark Magician raises his staff, gathering in crackling yellow energy, then attacks with black, crackling power that reverses the colors around it. Labyrinth Tank shatters.
Dox's lifepoints fall to 1900.
Kaiba and Kemo are standing before a dark, heavy metal door.
Kemo places his hand on the scanner next to the door; after a moment, it slides open.
Pegasus reaches for the wineglass beside his ornate little plate of cheese wedges.
Pegasus looks straight ahead, a golden glint visible through his hair; he does, indeed, know. He sips from his glass.
He sits in the dark, ankles chained to the wall with heavy manacles. He looks up to the ceiling, hoping for rescue.
Para draws, then smiles.
Yugi and Joey don't like the sound of that.
Para's looking at his card, Sanga of Thunder. As he thinks, he envisions the other two deities, then the Gate Guardian itself.
Joey draws.
Flame Swordsman passes by the Dark Magician and keeps walking, turning a corner into a parallel corridor; Dark Magician and Flame Swordsman now stand on opposite sides of the same wall.
He draws, then chuckles; he drew Suijin.
A second box, of identical make, appears beside the first; its seal is different.
A glowing golden eye appears on his forehead as he stares down the boxes; the air around the arena seems cloaked in shadowy green fog.
Dungeon Worm grows bigger; its attack points are now 2200.
Dungeon Worm dives into the rock of the labyrinth floor.
Dungeon Worm explodes from the ground underneath Yugi's Celtic Guardian, trapping him in its rows of sharp teeth.
With Celtic Guardian in its jaws, Dungeon Worm dives back down the hole from whence it came. Yugi's lifepoints fall to 800; he grimaces.
A big black top hat with a red and white checkered hatband and a question mark on the front appears on top of the Dark Magician, then whisks itself off around the corner and scoops up Flame Swordsman, the spreads itself out into four different, identical hats.
Monster Tamer is a lean, muscular guy with a whip, wearing a red head cloth, bare chest, plain linen pants, and spiky armbands.
Monster Tamer cracks his whip.
The Dungeon Worm bursts out through the top of a hat; nothing's in its mouth. The hat was empty.
The Dungeon Worm squirms its way back down through the hat, with disgusting squelching noises.
Joey taps the touch screen on E3; Flame Swordsman jumps out of his hat.
Flames swirl dramatically around the Swordsman's blade, raising his attack points to 2500.
The flames from the sword are alive, appearing in front as the head of a dragon; they dive down through the ruined hat.
Dox's lifepoints fall to 1600.
He draws, and looks; he got it!.
They go into handsprings, crossing at a right angle, then leap high in the air rolling and land stamping.
Yugi and Joey do not like the sound of this.
A third box appears next to the first two. The field is beginning to rumble.
The boxes start shaking violently.
The boxes fly open, and a stream of different-colored light bursts from each; they twine and swirl together in the air-- red, blue, and yellow-- until the air is shimmering with every shade in-between.
The three seals appear against the swirling rainbow light, and out of it appears...
The monster stands on thick blue legs; Suijin's head and shoulders serve it for a pelvic bowl, with Suijin's face and crest at the center. On top of it, the monster's stomach bears green Kazejin's emblem. The upper torso and arms are dark bronze-yellow Sanga, with glass bulbs on a mantle across its back ready to hold electricity. All together, they make a formidable and frightening creature.
The Gate Guardian's attack points still are three separate totals.
Kaiba grabs him by the shoulder, spins him around, grabs the front of his jacket and drags him up face-to-face.
Kaiba isn't too reassured.
Seto and Mokie watch the car drive away, hand in hand, then Mokie turns anxiously to Seto.
End Flashback.
He looks at the picture in his locket.
Kemo steps on a stone tile on the floor, and it sinks down; a hidden switch! An alarm sounds.
Kaiba glares, but shoves Kemo aside and runs, down the dark passageways beyond and out of sight.
Gold gleams under his hair.
Pegasus sets down his glass and walks out.
Mokuba struggles to his feet, weighed down by the chains.
He places two facedowns.
Gate Guardian is big enough to take aim at Flame Swordsman over the wall of the maze. Joey turns to Yugi.
Gate Guardian shoots a bright pink beam of concentrated power.
To Be Continued...
Yugi grits his teeth and doesn't answer.
The attack hits Flame Swordsman.) Para: Ha! Now you see, our Gate Guardian conquers all!.
Yugi picks up one of his facedowns and shows it-- Mirror Force.
Flame Swordsman didn't actually get hit; a prismatic barrier stopped the attack just short of him, and is bouncing it back whence it came.
The center portion Kazejin, puffs up its cheeks and blows a mighty wind, deflecting the energy of the attack.
The Mirror Force blast hits Monster Tamer and obliterates him.
Para's lifepoints fall from 1700 to 900, Dox's stand at 1600.
Yugi turns and shares a smile with Joey; his lifepoints are 800, Joey's 1600.
Téa, Tristan, and Bakura are spectating from behind Yugi and Joey, who stand at the two corners of the blue end of the field. The Paradox brothers stand opposite them at the red corners. Between them, the dueling field is a maze, with Joey's Flame Swordsman standing next to two Magical Hats a few turns away from reaching the end of the maze-- and Gate Guardian-- at the Paradox Brothers' end of the field.
Three goons meet in the light of the nearest torch.
All three goons run off again. A moment later, Kaiba, metal briefcase in hand, jumps down from the shadowed ceiling, looks warily in the direction they left, and runs forward, deeper into the dungeons.
The flame from Swordsman's sword has a life of its own, forming the front end of itself like the head of a dragon as it lunges forward to attack.
Then, a gush of water pours from the bottom portion, Suijin, creating a wall of water to douse the fire on contact.
The water keeps gushing, and Suijin is spraying it into the maze corridors, flooding around the Magical Hats and sweeping toward Flame Swordsman!.
The Paradox Brothers do their backflips again...
And leap and roll in midair...
And land.
Para's lifepoints hold at 900, Dox's 1600, Yugi's 800, and Joey's have fallen to 1300.
The maze field is now a few inches deep in water.
The brothers smirk.
Every passage of the maze is flooded; the brothers look worried.
The electricity hops across the surface of the water, around every turn.
The electricity keeps going.
Gate Guardian doesn't respond.
Yugi reaches for a facedown card.
Yugi shows the trap Spellbinding Circle.
Suijin shatters, leaving Gate Guardian's middle and torso hovering in the air.
Para has 900 lifepoints left, Dox's fall to 900, Yugi has 800, Joey 1300.
Spellbinding Circle shatters.
He goes to draw; Yugi watches.
Summoned Skull growls a welcome as Red-Eyes lands on the field.) Yugi (Yami): And now, with the magic of my "Polymerization" card, I'll combine Joey's Red-Eyes with my Summoned Skull.
Summoned Skull and Red-Eyes are merging together in a swirl of bright purple light.
The result is a hybrid of Summoned Skull and Red-Eyes, a bipedal dragon armored in charcoal-grey skeletal bone.
Yugi and Joey frown.
Yugi and Joey watch tensely as the brothers go into another acrobatic routine. Para flips one way, Dox the other, and they jump high in the air, spinning over and over, then land stomping.
Pronounced 'ree-OH-koo'.
Yugi's lifepoints fall to 400, Joey's to 650.
Sanga's points increase to 3000; Kazejin's now read 3050.
Yugi draws his card, and looks.
Dark Magician bursts from one of the hats in a beam of light.
Dark Magician walks through the maze alone.
Dark Magician calmly turns the final corner of the maze.
At this point, Dark Magician now stands looking up at the towering Gate Guardian, hovering as far off the ground as the sorcerer is tall.
"Monster Reborn".
Sanga charges up to attack, Kazejin sucks in air. The lightning gathers around Kazejin, who then puffs out a pink gust that carries the electricity with it, sparking with the power of both thunder and wind, heading straight for the Dark Magician.
His voice echoes with power as he commands--.
The blast is about to hit Dark Magician. Then he disappears inside a column of water that shoots up around him.
The blast breaks against the fast-running water. Dark Magician can be seen behind it, unharmed.
Suijin rises into view, still gushing its defense; Dark Magician is standing on its back.
Suijin stops spraying.
Yugi watches him, smiling.
Joey hesitates on the draw, then pulls his card.
Joey thinks really, comically hard about what to do with such a card.
The brothers look anxious.) Joey: Here it goes-- I'll use Copycat, and play it as Riryoku!.
Even Yugi's surprised.
Both of the brothers' lifepoints decrease to 450.
Black Skull's eyes glow bright red, and it roars as its points increase to 4000.
Kazejin breathes a gust of pink light.
Suijin fires a blast of water, which neutralizes the attack from Kazejin.
Sanga attacks next. Dark Magician jumps free just before the lightning hits Suijin full in the face and shatters it.
Yugi shows his next magic card.
In clouds of colorful sparkles-- reddish for Dark Magician, bluish for Black Skull Dragon-- the two monsters switch places. Now Black Skull Dragon is standing face-to-face with Gate Guardian, and just as tall. The Paradox brothers look scared.
Black Skull Dragon generates a fireball in shades of an incoming comet, red and black.
Despite being defeated, the brothers don't look cowed; they have another nasty trick up their sleeves still...
Yugi reacts warily.
And reacts, going for a weapon in his suit jacket.
Kaiba catches him from behind, chopping with his hand, and he goes down. Having incapacitated both door guards, Kaiba takes his keys and keeps moving to the iron-barred cell door nearby. He grips the bar, at last setting eyes on Mokuba. His little brother sits there chained to the wall with heavy manacles, staring at the ground, weary with despair.
Mokuba stands.
He tried to take a step, but the chains weigh him down.
Kaiba crouches down and starts picking the lock. Just then--.
Kaiba looks up warily. Pegasus is approaching them. He claps his hands in mocking applause.
Kaiba's eyes narrow; not only in anger, but in fear.
The Paradox brothers, Yugi, Joey, Tristan, Téa, and Bakura all stand before the two doors at the far end of the room.
Para indicates the door to his right, marked with his symbol.
Dox indicates the opposite door, to his right, which is decorated with his symbol.
Tristan glares; Bakura and Téa shake their heads.
Yugi hasn't taken his attention off of the two brothers and their challenge. He smiles his magician's smile, and holds up two coins between his fingers, one marked with each symbol.
His four friends look anxious.
Yugi holds out his closed fists, fingers down.
A few strands of Pegasus' hair falls aside, and the Millennium Eye glints in the darkness...
He holds up both fists. The brothers watch tensely. Yugi looks from one fist, to the other, deciding carefully. Left? Or right? Or left?  At last, he opens his left fist; the coin with the Dox emblem shimmers in his palm.
Yugi hasn't lost his challenging smile; Joey looks anxious.
Yugi frowns.
Yugi's friends groan.
Yugi is thinking of the magical labyrinth from the duel, and how the pathways changed.
Yugi raises his unopened right fist.
He opens the second fist, and reveals-- a second coin marked with the Dox symbol.
Everyone else is shocked.) Yugi (Yami): I *figured* the two of you would pull a stunt like this, so I pulled a stunt of my own with these two coins. Instead of marking them both with just *one* door insignia, I marked the second coin with *two*--.
He flips it in the air, showing the Para symbol on one side and the Dox symbol on the other.
The Paradox brothers recoil from the coin in his hand.
The Dox door swings open on darkness, leading into more catacombs...
The last few strands of white hair fall aside and the Millennium Eye lights up, shining bright golden light. Kaiba winces and closes his eyes.
The light fades. Kaiba opens his eyes, startled; what just happened? He looks into the cell.
Mokuba has fallen facedown on the stone floor; he isn't moving.
Pegasus holds up a card with a gold base, like a monster card; the card picture shimmers, then Mokuba appears, hands upraised as though the surface of the card is a glass wall, mouth open as though to cry out. Behind him is a dark void.) Kaiba: You monster! What've you done, what've you done to him?!.
Kaiba's mouth falls open in surprise.
Kaiba frowns, resolute; he'll do whatever he has to.
Kaiba angrily turns from Mokuba to Pegasus.
Pegasus shows Kaiba the card in which he trapped Mokuba's soul; Kaiba's brother seems to cry out for help from beyond the surface of the card.
Pegasus puts the card in his pocket and brings out a handful of star chips. They sparkle in the air as he carelessly tosses them on the floor around Kaiba's feet. Kaiba looks down, surprised.
Pegasus unties the cord on his collar.
Kaiba growls under his breath. Pegasus plays with the cord, tugging it back and forth like the struggle he mentions.
Pegasus holds up the two ends of the cord, indicating the two people he's talking about. Kaiba watches him coldly.
With that, Pegasus reties the cord and pulls the two loops of the bow tight.
He looks at Mokuba, unconscious in the cell.
Pegasus just laughs; the bow on his collar is already tied...
Yugi and Téa are still climbing the stairs from underground; Tristan, Joey, and Bakura are already at the top.
Bakura is examining the Millennium Ring; one point on it is sticking straight up, glowing.
She points beyond the cliffside to their right; they've emerged from underground in the shadow of the craggy hill on which the castle stands, a short distance to the right of the stairs.
Téa regards Yugi a moment longer, thinking.
End Flashback.
Téa considers the two faces of Yugi; her wide-eyed friend, and the bold and confident duelist.) Téa (think): Our friend whom we've known for years, and a more mysterious guy who shows up only when Yugi's in over his head. Wait-- maybe there *are* two Yugis!!.
Yami takes a card from his hand, and summons it; little Yugi appears on the field in front of him in the armor of the Dark Magician.
Yugi's attack hits Yami Bakura, forced into the costume of the Lady of Faith, and destroys him. End Flashback.
Joey, Tristan, and Bakura are already climbing the stairs to the castle.
Yugi takes one step, and trips on a rock, falling in the dirt on his face.
Yugi looks up at her.
The doors open on Joey and Yugi, entering the restaurant.
Téa has her fakiest service smile in place.
She freezes, breaking out in sweat.
She turns away so they can't see her terror.
Meanwhile Yugi and Joey have grabbed a table.
A tray of burgers and sodas is slammed down on the table; both guys jump.
Téa squeezes the ketchup bottle in her hand and callously drowns their burgers in it. Ketchup splatters on their chagrined faces.
Téa has turned away from them, one hand on her hip.
Téa turns back to them with a smile.
She clenches her fists and says the next in a rush, bracing herself for their reaction.
Long pause. Téa opens her eyes, surprised.
Joey leans back on his elbows.
He rubs the drops of ketchup off his face with a thumb and eats it.
Yugi's face is still speckled with ketchup.
Téa smiles.
Téa opens her locker, and finds a handwritten note on top of her shoes.
Yugi's voice reads the note in VO. Onscreen, the note appears as gibberish.
Téa turns the card over; the back is decorated with a pair of pink ballet shoes.
Téa opens a door, letting light into the dark warehouse.
Téa marches into the room, shoulders tense with anger.
The door closes behind her.
Téa backs up to the wall, afraid.
Continue Flashback. Téa is cornered in a dark warehouse by a thug.
Téa seems to have frozen. Just then, the door opens and Yugi runs in.
Little Yugi grabs Téa's attacker around the waist and hangs on, though the taller man tries to shake him off.
The thug finally breaks Yugi's grip, slamming him against a stack of metal beams. Yugi stays down.
Téa joins the fight, running in and biting the thug's right arm through his sweatshirt. He groans and shoves her back.
Téa is slammed back against a wall opposite Yugi, and slumps to the ground. Then the Millennium Puzzle begins to glow, and Yugi cries out--.
As the word is spoken, the voice speaking it grows deeper. From a grey void appears swirling lines, strange symbols, rushing wind, and a column of blue-white light, in which there appears a figure. He's like Yugi, but isn't. The stronger Yugi is already on his feet, standing between their assailant, crouched on the floor in Téa's direction, and the now closed door.
The other Yugi produces his dueling deck.
He pulls a card from the offered deck, then looks at it.) FB Thug: Hahahaha-- let's see ya beat this card! Its points are really high!.
The individual who isn't quite Yugi closes his eyes, and draws his card. He looks, then smiles.
The mugger pauses, then starts laughing.
He lunges, a fist raised. A small eye glows iridescently on the other Yugi's forehead, as he replies dismissively--.
The thug stops cold; his world reverses color polarity, then shatters. He falls to the ground. A moment later, Téa blearily opens her eyes.
Her vision blurs in and out of focus; she looks up at the other Yugi.
She stares up at him, speechless.
End Flashback.
Téa crouches down to talk to her friend, who's still on the ground after he tripped.
He smiles reluctantly.
She stands up, shaking off the tension.
Yugi cheers up.
Their friends shout to them from further up the stairs to the castle.
Téa offers Yugi a hand to help him up.
A lone figure stands on the top step, before the heavy iron door to the castle.
There stands Kaiba, metal briefcase on the ground next to him, arms folded across his chest in an attitude of superiority, wearing an expressionless frown that doesn't fully match the caution in his eyes.
Yugi's mouth falls open, as his own eyes meet the intensity of Kaiba's.
The wind around the steps stirs up dust around their feet, as all five of them stare up at Kaiba.
Yugi and his friends have climbed several more steps toward the top. Yugi repeats insistently--.
Tristan and Bakura grab Joey's arms and hold him back.
Joey slumps dramatically; they have a point.
Tristan and Bakura laugh nervously. Kaiba's eyes narrow; he's spotted the duel glove on Joey's right hand.
Blue-Eyes destroys Gaia. Yugi guards his face with one arm, then looks back to the field, teeth clenched with worry.
Kaiba shows the second Blue-Eyes card, and the dragon appears in a stream of green light.
Yugi summons Dark Magician, with 2500 attack points, against Kaiba's Judge Man, with 2200. Dark Magician attacks, and Judge Man shatters under the harsh, reverse-color glare of the sorcerer's power.
Blue-Eyes appears and blasts Dark Magician; he dissolves in the bright light of the attack, and Yugi is assailed by strong winds, and his lifepoints decrease to 400, against Kaiba's 1000.
An eight-pointed star appears out of a void on Yugi's side of the field.
Through one of the star's points emerges an arm, then another through the opposite point, then Exodia's head appears in the middle of the star as the great behemoth pulls itself from its prison and faces the three Blue-Eyes White Dragons, which are now looking decisively smaller.) Kaiba (VO): He assembled all five pieces of Exodia!.
Kaiba stumbles a few steps back on his platform, terrified.
Exodia concentrates energy between its massive palms, and then uses it to blow away all three Blue-Eyeses in a blaze of golden light.
Kaiba screams as the blaze obscures him from view... End Flashback.
Kaiba takes his locket from under his shirt and clicks it open; a much younger Mokuba smiles up at him.
Kaiba's eyes literally seem to be aflame.
Another gust of wind rolls past. Then the Millennium Puzzle begins to glow, and Yugi cries out--.
As the word is spoken, the voice speaking it grows deeper. From a grey void appears swirling lines, strange symbols, rushing wind, and a column of blue-white light, in which there appears a figure. He's like Yugi, but isn't. The Puzzle's glow dims, matching an eye symbol glimmering on the other Yugi's forehead. He regards Kaiba with a wary frown.
Téa dumbfoundedly watches the bolder Yugi, as his frown becomes a challenging smile.
Yugi climbs a few more steps toward Kaiba.
Kaiba replies with a satisfied, though not entirely friendly, smile, and picks up his briefcase.
While Yugi and Kaiba square off on the wall above...
He shows his full duel glove to the door guard, Kemo.
He passes through the gate, hands in pockets, and adds to himself--.
He shows his handful of star chips.
Yugi takes the five stars out of the slots on his glove.
Each duelist throws his five chips across to the other; they sparkle in the air. Kaiba brandishes the throwing disk portion of his gear.
Both duelists slot their decks into the holders on their wrists, and small screens on the wrist holders light up, each displaying 'LP', then numbers counting up to halt at 2000.
Bandit Keith strolls out onto the castle wall, hands in his pockets.
He's spotted the duel over on another section of the wall, with Téa, Tristan, Joey, and Bakura spectating.
He looks closer at Yugi's opponent; Kaiba looks both anxious and uncompromising.
Kaiba throws his disk to the ground, where it spins, generating holographic sparks and weaving them into his first summoned monster.
Kaiba's hand of cards fans in front of him, each card as tall as he is. Battle Ox, Saggi the Dark Clown, Ancient Lamp (the trap card), and Blue-Eyes White Dragon.
Like Kaiba, Yugi has placed the four cards of his hand around his disk's outer panels, and the monster he's summoning face up on the center panel. He prepares to throw it.
Stats appear for both monsters, now that the first turn of the duel is complete.
Curse of Dragon soars higher, and singes Ryu-Kishin off the field.
Yugi's hand, also around him in holograms, is Multiply, Monster Replace, Dark Magician, and The Eye of Truth. Kaiba's lifepoints decrease to 1600, and Kaiba catches his disk when it retracts.
Kaiba plays his draw, and throws the disk.
The sparks solidify into a hulking, purple demon warrior with a big, jagged sword and a red cape.
A ghostly fog wraps around Swordstalker's blade, causing it to flame blue and Swordstalker's attack points to rise to 2400. Yugi's mouth drops open in shock.
Curse of Dragon glows-- then disappears; Swordstalker swipes right through it.
One of the holographic cards facing Yugi turns around.) Yugi (Yami): This card switches the monster on the field with the monster in my hand that has the *highest* attack power!.
Now Kaiba looks shocked.
The sorcerer holds his staff forward and fires a blast of pink light; Swordstalker reverses color, then shatters with a stifled shriek.
Kaiba's lifepoints decrease to 1500; Yugi's are still at 2000.
The disk is retracted on its cord through Kaiba's holographic cards, and those fold themselves to the side and disappear. Kaiba stands there nonchalantly, disk in hand and the other hand in his pocket.
Kaiba's cards fan around him again.
La Jinn is sucked into the lamp.
Dark Magician's attack blasts forth. The lamp reverses color, then flares with multicolored light.
The multicolored blast hits Curse of Dragon, which vanishes with a cry.
Now both duelists have 1500 lifepoints.
Yugi smiles a challenge.
Kaiba returns the smile in kind.
In the blinding white glow appears a dragon whose eyes are dark, smoldering blue, with three shadowed heads and light blue scales, towering at Kaiba's back as he laughs. To Be Continued...